<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title>en-awg-I-5</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <p>AWG Online Edition</p>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Converted from AWG intro JSON</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
      <langUsage>
        <language ident="en" />
      </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text xml:lang="en">
    <body>
      <div xml:id="preamble">
        <p>Series I, Section 5 of the <hi rend="italic">Anton Webern Gesamtausgabe</hi> (AWG) presents the songs with piano accompaniment by Anton Webern in the versions (<hi rend="italic">Textfassungen</hi>) to which he gave opus numbers and were either published during his lifetime or intended for publication (Opp. 3, 4, 12, 23 and 25), plus various individual songs (such as the George songs M 143–146) that are grouped together in clusters in this edition because the common circumstances of their composition imply that they belong together (such clusters are in the German-language documentation of the AWG referred to throughout as <hi rend="italic">Editionskomplexe</hi>). Further clusters of songs that were not published during Webern’s lifetime, including those assigned opus numbers that later became obsolete (e.g. the Dehmel songs M 83, 119, 130–131), will be published in Series II, Section 5.</p>
      </div>
      <div xml:id="op3+4">
        <head>The George Songs</head>
        <p>The earliest versions of Webern’s 14 songs with piano accompaniment to texts by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/tbTyrcF=RIu4gE5_qEIeQAa.20230526T204919189956266Z">Stefan George</ref> (M 133–146) were presumably composed between December 1907 and 1909. Together with the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Yh91U7HQRr=tS9=AvZ6=FgL.20240706T164223083836591Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Five Movements for String Quartet</hi> M 147–151</ref> and the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/EPKg=eIcRGO44SrOX=JpAwM.20240706T164218678674628Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Six Pieces for Large Orchestra</hi> M 152–157</ref>, they are among his first so-called atonal compositions. The two collections <hi rend="italic">Five Songs from </hi>Der siebente Ring<hi rend="italic"> by Stefan George</hi>, Op. 3 and <hi rend="italic">Five Songs on Poems of Stefan George</hi>, Op. 4 were published in 1919 and 1923 respectively. However, the specific songs collected in these opus numbers were not fixed from the beginning. Determining their content was a lengthy process, the various stages of which can no longer be reconstructed with certainty, and the musical text of most of these songs went through different versions.</p>
        <p>We can trace Webern’s initial reception of George’s work back to circa 1900, when he copied the poem “Indes deine mutter dich stillt” into one of his diaries.<ptr target="#note-1" /> We have no documentary proof either of any compositional engagement with this poem on his part, nor of his having read more George. He may have had further contact with George’s poetry in the Ansorge Society in Vienna, where Webern and his student friend <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/2LY3f_2GT4ahwzwZAGt5JQK.20230914T10120760428422Z">Karl Horwitz</ref> were active from 1904 onwards, and whose evening events included performances of George settings by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/38eKiU0DQk62jq=iCAl02Q5.20160728T094903Z">Conrad Ansorge</ref> (<hi rend="italic">Five Songs on Poems of Stefan George</hi>, Op. 14).<ptr target="#note-2" />
        </p>
        <p>In the summer of 1907, Webern acquired an edition of George’s <hi rend="italic">Das Jahr der Seele</hi> and, in the summer of 1908, copies of <hi rend="italic">Die Bücher der Hirten- und Preisgedichte der Sagen</hi>
          <hi rend="italic">und Sänge und der hängenden Gärten</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Der siebente Ring</hi>.<ptr target="#note-3" /> Webern marked all these books with crosses and angle marks, some of them alongside the titles of poems that he set (though not next to all the ones he later composed); these also include the poems he used for choral works or orchestral songs (<hi rend="italic">Entflieht auf leichten kähnen</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Kunfttag III</hi>). Only in one case (<hi rend="italic">Kunfttag II</hi>) do we find a mark next to a poem for which no musical setting is known by Webern. There are no documents to help us identify the criteria that Webern used when choosing texts from the volumes of poetry that were available to him.<ptr target="#note-4" />
        </p>
        <p>One incentive for Webern’s compositional engagement with George’s poems presumably came from <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Y1=4oD0OTZqzzOQM=H9ywA_.20230526T214948203842794Z">Arnold Schoenberg’s</ref> own settings. Schoenberg had composed the song “Ich darf nicht dankend”, Op. 14, No. 1 on 17 December 1907 and numerous other songs for his growing cycle <hi rend="italic">Fifteen Poems from </hi>The Book of Hanging Gardens<hi rend="italic"> by Stefan George</hi>, Op. 15, from March to May 1908 (we have definite proof that he composed the songs Op. 15 Nos. 3–8 at that time).<ptr target="#note-5" /> In a letter dated 11 June 1908 from Webern to Schoenberg, there are indications that the former already knew some of the songs that the latter had completed by this time.<ptr target="#note-6" /> Various features make it seem plausible that “Erwachen aus dem tiefsten Traumesschoße” M 143 represents Webern’s first setting of a poem by George for voice and piano, as it clearly refers to Schoenberg’s Op. 14, No. 1. Unlike most of Webern’s later songs, these two songs still have a key signature (as does his chorus <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/B4KoqjrjQ9G=proU5qmQfwN.20240706T164216979936562Z">“Entflieht auf leichten Kähnen” M 129</ref>, quite possibly written in 1907/08), which indicates a comparatively early date of conception. Given that the proven date of composition of Schoenberg’s Op. 14, No. 1 provides us with an earliest possible date for Webern’s song, the latter could have been composed between December 1907 and June 1908.<ptr target="#note-7" /> A comparison of the handwriting and the types of music paper used suggests that the initial versions of the following songs (in one case: the sole extant version [<hi rend="italic">einzige Textfassung</hi>]) could also have been written by mid-1908, including “Erwachen aus dem tiefsten Traumesschoße” M 143:</p>
        <table>
          <row>
            <cell>“Dies ist ein Lied” M 133</cell>
            <cell>(version 1 in <hi rend="bold">A</hi>, version 2 in <hi rend="bold">B</hi>)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Erwachen aus dem tiefsten Traumesschoße” M 143</cell>
            <cell>(sole extant version in <hi rend="bold">A</hi>)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Im Windesweben” M 134</cell>
            <cell>(version 1 in <hi rend="bold">A</hi>)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">Kunfttag I</hi> M 144</cell>
            <cell>(sole version in <hi rend="bold">A</hi>)</cell>
          </row>
        </table>
        <p>Webern wrote to Schoenberg from Berlin in December 1908, requesting a letter of recommendation to <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/LNUtPXbOQCmUTNr=GBZaZAH.20170122T132211Z">Richard Strauss</ref>. He also discusses establishing contact with the Berlin publisher <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Sdcfn73IQAuYJwfNVf5L=wi.20240808T10224670447249Z">Max Marschalk</ref> of the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/9f8KM6m4T6WF_kPMnR46iwF.20250130T130003717362223Z">Dreililien publishing company</ref> (which was probably suggested by Schoenberg). Webern goes on to say that he does not have enough material to make up a volume of songs:</p>
        <p>I don’t know, I’m so stupidly shy. That’s also why I haven’t yet been to Marschalk.</p>
        <p>If only I had a volume of songs ready. But this means he can’t take anything at the moment.</p>
        <p>On the one hand, I’d like to, but on the other hand –<ptr target="#note-8" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern clearly did not consider either his four George songs (which were presumably finished by late 1908) nor his five Dehmel songs M 83, M 119, M 130–132 (which he had also already composed) to be suitable for publication.<ptr target="#note-9" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern’s letter to <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/KfaVxMixRK=UTqPAs5xQcgt.20230526T211228012951052Z">Heinrich Jalowetz</ref> of 25 May 1909, written in Vienna, provides an explicit, dated reference to the composition of a George song: “I have – thank God – written something again. A song after George, ‘Trauer I’ (VII Ring).”<ptr target="#note-10" /> Webern went to his family’s estate of Preglhof in Carinthia on 29 May and spent the ensuing weeks and months there, during which time he reported to Schoenberg on the completion of a first version of his <hi rend="italic">Five Movements for String Quartet</hi> M 147–151 and on further plans for songs and orchestral works (the latter being the <hi rend="italic">Six Pieces for Large Orchestra</hi> M 152–157).<ptr target="#note-11" /> However, his plans were initially delayed by the death and funeral of his maternal grandfather, <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/lbyiNfC4QqaD8PG87PJokQQ.20140822T081817Z">Anton Geer</ref>:</p>
        <p>Yes, for the reasons given above, I’ve only written one song since the quartet. Stefan George again. That was the day before yesterday and yesterday. Now a few more are on their way. I have so little peace here now. But it’s all still got to come together.<ptr target="#note-12" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern’s visit to Carinthia was also interrupted – presumably from mid-July onwards – by a brief <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/TCTzCQq8SNiQplfyM7_dowt.20241016T123705518689834Z">engagement at the theatre in Innsbruck</ref>. But by the end of July, Webern was writing to Schoenberg from Preglhof once again, and on 20 August he wrote:</p>
        <p>Meanwhile, I have written 2 songs and two orchestral pieces. The songs are yet again quite different from before. The orchestral pieces too, of course.<ptr target="#note-13" />
        </p>
        <p>It is unclear precisely to which George songs Webern was referring in his letters to Schoenberg. The only George song by Webern that we can date more precisely thus remains <hi rend="italic">Trauer</hi>
          <hi rend="italic">I</hi> M 145, which he had written shortly before 25 May 1909, thus before his visit to Carinthia. Both the manuscript paper that he used and a clear shift in his handwriting style (when compared to the abovementioned songs that were probably composed in 1908) together suggest that, after <hi rend="italic">Trauer</hi>
          <hi rend="italic">I</hi> M 145, Webern also wrote the initial versions of the following songs in the course of the summer or autumn of 1909 (in some cases, these are the only versions of the songs in question):</p>
        <table>
          <row>
            <cell>“An Bachesranft” M 135</cell>
            <cell>(version 1 in <hi rend="bold">E</hi>)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Das lockere Saatgefilde” M 146</cell>
            <cell>(sole extant version in <hi rend="bold">A</hi>)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">Eingang</hi> M 138</cell>
            <cell>(version 1 in <hi rend="bold">A</hi>)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Im Morgentaun” M 136</cell>
            <cell>(version 1 in <hi rend="bold">D</hi> [fragment], <hi rend="bold">E</hi> and <hi rend="bold">G</hi>)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Ja Heil und Dank dir” M 140</cell>
            <cell>(version 1 in <hi rend="bold">B</hi>)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Kahl reckt der Baum” M 137</cell>
            <cell>(version 1 in <hi rend="bold">E</hi>)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Noch zwingt mich Treue” M 139</cell>
            <cell>(version 1 in <hi rend="bold">B</hi>)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“So ich traurig bin” M 141</cell>
            <cell>(version 1 in <hi rend="bold">B</hi>)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">Trauer I</hi> M 145</cell>
            <cell>(sole extant version in <hi rend="bold">A</hi> – before 25 May 1909)</cell>
          </row>
        </table>
        <p>On the basis of our assessment of Webern’s handwriting, a further manuscript can also be assigned to this period: “Dies ist ein Lied” M 133 (version 2, which is the basic layer in <hi rend="bold">C</hi>). Since the autograph of “Ihr tratet zu dem Herde” M 142 ([<hi rend="bold">C</hi>]) has not survived, it is naturally impossible to use these criteria to determine whether it was also written in 1909 or already in 1908.</p>
        <p>In contrast to Webern’s compositions from before 1908 and after 1914, no conceptual sketches in pencil (i. e. continuity drafts, which were often dated) have survived for the George songs (the same applies to most other works composed in the same period). We only find pencil corrections to individual passages in the existing ink manuscripts. Webern commonly made such continuity drafts in pencil during other creative periods of his life, but it is impossible to make any general statement about whether this was also the case here, or whether the manuscripts in ink of the early versions of these songs served the function of a sketch during the compositional process.<ptr target="#note-14" />
        </p>
        <p>
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/BaY0I9oeTqakiebhj7ruugD.20230526T132843454394681Z">Six George songs were given their world premiere on 8 February 1910 in Vienna</ref>, at a concert of the Verein für Kunst und Kultur (the “Association for Art and Culture” that was the successor of the Ansorge Society). The same concert featured Webern’s <hi rend="italic">Five Movements for String Quartet</hi> M 147–151 and songs by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/mIH5KyAsSduW94DL2=3Fuwa.20160728T095436Z">Bruno Walter</ref> and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/MtkzBFhFTvqhToE8=fv8JgM.20230526T223754212295164Z">Karl Weigl</ref>.<ptr target="#note-15" /> Webern’s songs were sung by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/mIH5KyAsSduW94DL2=3Fuwa.20160728T095436Z">Martha Winternitz-Dorda</ref>, accompanied by the composer. Just a few weeks earlier, on 14 January 1910, she had sung the world premiere of Schoenberg’s <hi rend="italic">Fifteen Poems from </hi>The Book of Hanging Gardens<hi rend="italic"> by Stefan George</hi>, Op. 15 in a concert of his works organized by the same Association for Art and Culture. The programme booklet for the concert of 8 February gave the texts of Webern’s six George settings (listed below) under the collective title “Songs after Stefan George”, arranged in two groups according to the poetry volumes from which they were taken. No opus number was given (in the following schematic summary, we name the version of the song that was presumably performed on this occasion):</p>
        <table>
          <row>
            <cell cols="2">From <hi rend="italic">Der siebente Ring</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">Eingang</hi> M 138</cell>
            <cell>(version 1)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Dies ist ein Lied” M 133</cell>
            <cell>(version 2)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Im Windesweben” M 134</cell>
            <cell>(version 2)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Kahl reckt der Baum” M 137</cell>
            <cell>(version 1)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell cols="2">From <hi rend="italic">Das Jahr der Seele</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Noch zwingt mich Treue” M 139</cell>
            <cell>(version 1)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Ihr tratet zu dem Herde” M 142</cell>
            <cell>(unknown version)</cell>
          </row>
        </table>
        <p>Manuscript copies in other hands have survived of almost all these songs in <hi rend="bold">F</hi> (see the List of Sources [<hi rend="italic">Quellenübersicht</hi>] for Op. 3) and <hi rend="bold">D</hi> (see the List of Sources for Op. 4) that were most likely made for this specific performance. These songs are numbered in pencil from “I” to “V” in these two sources; the numberings correspond to the order of the texts as given in the programme booklet (while no copy of “Ihr tratet zu dem Herde” M 142 [<hi rend="bold">E</hi>] has survived, it no doubt existed and was presumably given the number “VI”). Certain musical and orthographic details in the copyist’s manuscripts seem especially clumsy, while their text underlay reveals similarities with the handwriting of <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/H8K9PrKCTemdX5K7OH=TIAa.20230526T190059710647045Z">Wilhelmine (Minna) Mörtl</ref>, who later became Webern’s wife. These manuscript copies generally contain numerous annotations by Webern himself, some of which (in “Dies ist ein Lied” M 133 most of all) entail a process of revision resulting in later versions of the song. However, some of the annotations in red crayon were probably made in the context of preparations for the first performances in February 1910, when the abovementioned copies were presumably used by the singer. When we consider the versions of the musical text that were most likely performed on that occasion, we can surmise that Webern probably played the piano accompaniment from the following sources:</p>
        <table>
          <row>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">Eingang</hi> M 138:</cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="bold">A</hi> (version 1)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Dies ist ein Lied” M 133:</cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="bold">C</hi> (version 2)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Im Windesweben” M 134:</cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="bold">E</hi> (version 2)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Kahl reckt der Baum” M 137:</cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="bold">E</hi> (version 1)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Noch zwingt mich Treue” M 139:</cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="bold">B</hi> (version 1)</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>“Ihr tratet zu dem Herde” M 142:</cell>
            <cell>[<hi rend="bold">C</hi>] (unknown version)</cell>
          </row>
        </table>
        <p>Webern’s compositions that were performed in this concert in 1910 were given several negative reviews. As an example, we offer here a passage from <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/iotY9BiAT_menT4Cu72ecQg.20230706T155633584541899Z">Julius Korngold’s</ref> review in the <hi rend="italic">Neue Freie Presse</hi> in which he also makes explicit reference to the previous month’s concert in which Schoenberg’s George songs, Op. 15, were given their first performance:<ptr target="#note-16" />
        </p>
        <p>We were recently occupied with the case of Schoenberg, and now we also have the case of Anton v. Webern, even if both are basically one. For Mr v. Webern is Schoenberg’s pupil, one who not only swears by his master’s words, but in many a respect outdoes him. This is a good thing; one feels less stressed, and experiences an almost comfortable indifference. One was able to engage with [the work of] the teacher, and indeed one was compelled to do so, while that is not the case with his disciple. […] [his] six songs by Stephan [<hi rend="italic">sic</hi>] George also tread along Schoenberg’s path, and not just in his choice of poet. Chords from the new theory of harmony are accompanied by a psalmodizing singing voice using the relevant intervals. Even a musically trained, receptive listener here undergoes the psychological experience of thinking he is always hearing the same thing. Here, however, the words provide a certain degree of expression, though admittedly it is an expression throughout of mental dejection, of mental disintegration. If one listens in a spirit of good will, then one is reminded in their best moments of Octave Mirbeau’s painter, who ultimately only wanted to paint “souls”. . . .</p>
        <p>May the reader here forgive our grim merriment. But when performed on Shrove Tuesday, this music involuntarily infects our Ash-Wednesday criticism with a certain carnival mood.<ptr target="#note-17" />
        </p>
        <p>The six songs that were given their first performance in 1910 were merely a selection of what were presumably a total of 14 George songs that Webern had already composed at that time. In two handwritten lists of titles, probably drawn up before the first performances of all the songs, he had already divided them into two groups designated “Op. 2” and “Op. 4”, with seven songs each.<ptr target="#note-18" /> These two lists read as follows (with angle marks added in pencil, “[p]”, and in red crayon, “[r]”):</p>
        <table>
          <row>
            <cell cols="3">
              <hi rend="italic">Sieben Lieder</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell cols="3">
              <hi rend="italic">nach Gedichten von Stefan George</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell cols="3">
              <hi rend="italic">op. 2</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row />
          <row>
            <cell>[p]</cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">1. Eingang.</hi>
            </cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">(„VII. Ring“)</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>[p + r]</cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">2. „Dies ist ein Lied...“</hi>
            </cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">(„VII. Ring“)</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell />
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">3. „Erwachen aus dem tiefsten traumesschoße....“</hi> |</cell>
            <cell />
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell />
            <cell />
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">(„Jahr der Seele“)</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>[p + r]</cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">4. „Im windes-weben.....“</hi>
            </cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">(„VII. Ring“)</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell />
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">5. Kunfttag 1.</hi>
            </cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">–</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>[p + r]</cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">6. „Kahl reckt der baum..“</hi>
            </cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">–</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>[p]</cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">7.</hi> [„]<hi rend="italic">Im morgentaun....“ </hi>
            </cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">–</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row />
          <row>
            <cell cols="3">
              <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row />
          <row />
          <row>
            <cell cols="3">
              <hi rend="italic">Sieben Lieder        op. 4</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell cols="3">
              <hi rend="italic">nach Gedichten von Stefan George</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row />
          <row>
            <cell />
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">
                <del>1.</del> Trauer I („Maximin“)</hi>
            </cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">aus dem „VII. Ring“</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell />
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">2. „Ja heil und dank dir....“</hi>
            </cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic"> („Nach der Lese“) aus „Jahr der Seele“</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>[p + r]</cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">3. „Noch zwingt mich treue....“</hi>
            </cell>
            <cell>(„Waller im Schnee“) aus „Jahr der Seele“</cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>[p]</cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">4. „An bachesranft....“</hi>
            </cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">(„Lieder I–IV</hi> [sic]<hi rend="italic">“ aus dem VII. Ring“)</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell />
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">
                <del>5</del> „Das lockere saatgefilde....“</hi>
            </cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">(„Gezeiten“) aus dem „VII. Ring“</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell />
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">
                <del>6</del> „So ich traurig bin.....“</hi>
            </cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">(„Sänge eines fahrenden Spielmanns“</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell />
            <cell cols="2">
              <hi rend="italic">aus „Die Bücher der Hirten- und Preisgedichte, der Sagen u. Sänge u</hi>[.] <hi rend="italic">d. hängenden</hi> | <hi rend="italic">Gärten“</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
          <row>
            <cell>[r]</cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">7</hi>&amp;ngsp[p]&amp;ngsp<hi rend="italic">„Ihr tratet zu dem herde....“</hi>
            </cell>
            <cell>
              <hi rend="italic">(„Traurige Tänze“) aus „Jahr der Seele“</hi>
            </cell>
          </row>
        </table>
        <p>Several elements in these two lists<ptr target="#note-19" /> prove that they were not written at the same time. Given that the sequence of opus numbers that Webern had begun with his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/fcgOtGhnQMW3cH0Ddrd_Og_.20240706T164225097044107Z">Passacaglia M 127</ref> (his “Op. 1”) was interrupted by his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Yh91U7HQRr=tS9=AvZ6=FgL.20240706T164223083836591Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Five Movements for String Quartet</hi> M 147–151</ref> (designated “Op. 3”), he probably compiled his <hi rend="italic">Seven Songs</hi> (“Sieben Lieder”) “Op. 2” earlier than the songs that his second list designated as “Op. 4” (this would also seem to be confirmed by the fact that his “Op. 2” contains all the songs that he had presumably composed by 1908).<ptr target="#note-20" /> Despite the differences between them and the presumed chronological distance between the two lists, they both bear traces of having been reworked at the same time; they have the abovementioned angle marks in pencil and red crayon on the left, alongside several lines of text (in the last line of “Op. 4” also between the song number and the opening line). Furthermore, some numbers in the list for “Op. 4” (“1”, “5” and “6”) have been crossed out in pencil. It is possible that the red crayon markings denote the choice of songs for the performance of 8 February 1910 (in which case the angle mark next to “2. ‘Dies ist ein lied...’” in the list for “Op. 2” would also refer to “1. Eingang.” above it).<ptr target="#note-21" /> All the George songs, plus the two lists themselves, must in this case have been written before the date of this concert, and these two collections of songs would then presumably also have been among the compositions that Webern presented at a meeting that Schoenberg had organized with the director of <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/xiy9FauqRQqVl_dsLWMYVQz.20250204T110725416877022Z">Universal Edition</ref>, <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/u8SZfSTaRBGpPokzmC9nuAP.20150421T105405Z">Emil Hertzka</ref>, on 9 October 1909 (though none of these works was subsequently accepted by the publishing house).<ptr target="#note-22" />
        </p>
        <p>However, these two compilations do not simply constitute more extensive versions of the collections later printed as Webern’s Opp. 3 and 4.<ptr target="#note-23" /> For example, the ordering principle behind his <hi rend="italic">Five Songs from </hi>Der siebente Ring<hi rend="italic"> by Stefan George</hi>, Op. 3, published in 1919, played no role in his selection of songs for “Op. 2”.<ptr target="#note-24" /> In this Op. 3, Webern brought together all the texts that he had set to music from the poetic cycle <hi rend="italic">Lieder </hi>(<hi rend="italic">Songs</hi>) that George had included in <hi rend="italic">Der siebente Ring</hi> and also kept those songs in the order of the original poems.<ptr target="#note-25" /> “An Bachesranft” M 135, which features in this opus 3, also appears here in the list for “Op. 4”, while “So ich traurig bin” M 141, which was actually included in the <hi rend="italic">Five Songs on Poems of Stefan George</hi>, Op. 4, published in 1923, was deleted from the list for the <hi rend="italic">Seven Songs</hi> “Op. 4”.</p>
        <p>In early June 1911, Webern sent “some 10 songs” to the Dreililien publishing company in Berlin, together with his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Yh91U7HQRr=tS9=AvZ6=FgL.20240706T164223083836591Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Five Movements for String Quartet</hi> M 147–151</ref> and his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/hc0oIJblRH64d9of5jT0nQP.20240706T164226449599508Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Four Pieces for Violin and Piano</hi> M 161–164</ref>.<ptr target="#note-26" /> It is impossible to determine just which songs he sent. After all these works had been rejected, Webern submitted the same compositions to the publisher Tischer &amp; Jagenberg in Cologne in late September or early October,<ptr target="#note-27" /> though again without any of them being accepted for publication.<ptr target="#note-28" />
        </p>
        <p>In the autumn of 1911, Webern – along with Schoenberg and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Pkd2nTOqRkWsOdSNXSsJVA2.20230526T215003568534358Z">Alban Berg</ref> – received an invitation to contribute a musical supplement to the almanac <hi rend="italic">Der blaue Reiter</hi>, published by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/xvbDBmZTT=Gg5i1qNQ3Wsw3.20230526T200654760896718Z">Wassily Kandinsky</ref> and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/SK1WwjPdRVGv7bFS4DtiNg7.20200817T094817Z">Franz Marc</ref>. For this he chose “Ihr tratet zu dem Herde” M 142. A letter that Webern wrote to <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/ncGhx6iqTFmgq1Nffoq1lQQ.20130201T141420Z">Paul Königer</ref> reveals that he had also included this song in the selection sent to Tischer &amp; Jagenberg:</p>
        <p>You want this song from me; yes, I have sent the two copies I possessed to the “blauer Reiter” and to the publisher.</p>
        <p>But if it is still possible, I shall copy it out again from the sketch and give it to you as a gift.<ptr target="#note-29" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern had thus presumably sent the sources [<hi rend="bold">C</hi>] and [<hi rend="bold">E</hi>], neither of which has survived, to the Cologne publisher and to <hi rend="italic">Der blaue Reiter</hi>. When the publisher <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/SIBAtP6kQEWYnF31iUHwsQV.20180730T075028Z">Gerhard Tischer</ref> rejected his music in late December 1911 or early January 1912, Webern got his works back and was able to inform Königer that he would send the promised copy of the song: “You’ll get my song soon. By the way, it will appear in the ‘blauer Reiter’.”<ptr target="#note-30" /> (In late January, Webern was sent “the proofs of my song”,<ptr target="#note-31" /> i. e. presumably the proofs from the music engraver [<hi rend="bold">F</hi>] that were engraved after the copy he had sent). <hi rend="italic">Der blaue Reiter</hi> was published in May 1912, and Webern received his copy (with <hi rend="bold">G<hi rend="super">H</hi>
          </hi>) in early June.<ptr target="#note-32" />
        </p>
        <p>Already by the beginning of 1912, Webern was making plans for the private publication of a selection of nine songs together with others of his works, as he wrote in a letter to Berg:</p>
        <p>At Schoenberg’s insistence, I have decided to publish 4 of my works (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/fcgOtGhnQMW3cH0Ddrd_Og_.20240706T164225097044107Z">Passacaglia</ref>, 9 songs, <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Yh91U7HQRr=tS9=AvZ6=FgL.20240706T164223083836591Z">Quartet</ref> [the first] and the older <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/EPKg=eIcRGO44SrOX=JpAwM.20240706T164218678674628Z">6 orchestral pieces</ref>) with Straube (just like Schoenberg’s Quartet No. II). So I’ve got a lot to do with regard to revising these scores.<ptr target="#note-33" />
        </p>
        <p>This decision had been preceded by discussions with Schoenberg in February, whose diary records his having looked through several works by Webern, expressly mentioning his songs:</p>
        <p>Webern came on the afternoon in order to look through his songs with me (which he wants to publish). They again pleased me a lot. Truly an original talent. I can see that he’ll turn into something great.<ptr target="#note-34" />
        </p>
        <p>In his personal copy (<hi rend="bold">G<hi rend="super">H</hi>
          </hi>) of the song that he published in <hi rend="italic">Der blaue Reiter</hi>, Webern revised the musical text and added the opus number “2”. In the two abovementioned lists of the two sets of seven songs “Op. 2” and “Op. 4”, however, this song was still classified under “Op. 4”. So “Ihr tratet zu dem Herde” M 142 (version 2) was presumably part of a new collection of “9 songs” designated “Op. 2” that constituted a selection from all 14 of Webern’s George songs and replaced the two previous compilations. Just which other songs also belonged to this new collection remains undocumented. Ultimately, no Straube publication of the four aforementioned opus numbers came about. In fact, only the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/EPKg=eIcRGO44SrOX=JpAwM.20240706T164218678674628Z">orchestral pieces M 152–157</ref> were published thus in 1913, as Webern’s “Op. 4”.</p>
        <p>Instead, in a letter to Schoenberg sent in the summer of 1912, Webern mentions his plan to submit a different selection of his compositions to Simrock, from which he intentionally excluded his songs:</p>
        <p>I’ll be sending the following to Simrock today already: the “<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/fcgOtGhnQMW3cH0Ddrd_Og_.20240706T164225097044107Z">Passacaglia</ref>”[,] the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Yh91U7HQRr=tS9=AvZ6=FgL.20240706T164223083836591Z">quartet</ref> and the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/hc0oIJblRH64d9of5jT0nQP.20240706T164226449599508Z">violin pieces</ref>. I still haven’t copied out my songs properly, otherwise I would be sending them too. But I will speak of them in a letter. Perhaps he will then ask for the songs. By then I will have put them in order.<ptr target="#note-35" />
        </p>
        <p>But just a few weeks later, Webern’s works were rejected once again.<ptr target="#note-36" /> It remains unverifiable whether or not he had indeed subsequently “copied out [his] songs properly”. In early 1913, Webern ultimately sent an unspecified selection of his songs to the publishing house of Gadow in Hildburghausen, though again, clearly, without success.<ptr target="#note-37" />
        </p>
        <p>In the summer of 1914, Schoenberg once more approached Universal Edition about Webern.<ptr target="#note-38" /> After a conversation between Webern and Hertzka that took place on 25 June, it was finally agreed that the latter would publish “the score of <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/EPKg=eIcRGO44SrOX=JpAwM.20240706T164218678674628Z">Op. 4</ref>, the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/B4KoqjrjQ9G=proU5qmQfwN.20240706T164216979936562Z">chorus</ref> and a booklet of songs or the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/hc0oIJblRH64d9of5jT0nQP.20240706T164226449599508Z">violin pieces</ref>”<ptr target="#note-39" /> by Webern the following year. However, no decision ever had to be made about whether to publish a volume of his songs or the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/hc0oIJblRH64d9of5jT0nQP.20240706T164226449599508Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Four Pieces for Violin and Piano</hi> M 161–164</ref>, because the First World War broke out just a few weeks after their meeting, and economic reasons forced the cancellation of their plans.<ptr target="#note-40" />
        </p>
        <p>A few days before the outbreak of war, thanks to the mediation of Alban Berg and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/TQCVvoEpQ_SxRcwmPaZarQm.20230707T094639256354554Z">Alfred Kalmus</ref>, the possibility nevertheless arose for Webern to contribute something to a collective publication being prepared by Universal Edition entitled <hi rend="italic">Das moderne Lied</hi> (“The Modern Song”).<ptr target="#note-41" /> Webern submitted three songs – none of which can be identified today<ptr target="#note-42" /> – but none was included in the volume.<ptr target="#note-43" />
        </p>
        <p>An autograph title page by Webern, whose base layer was written in red ink, refers to a selection of nine George songs (fol. 8<hi rend="super">r</hi> in <ref target="https://edition.anton-webern.ch/dev/edition/complex/op4/report#source_H">
            <hi rend="bold">H</hi>
          </ref>): <ptr target="#note-44" />
        </p>
        <p>
          <hi rend="italic">Neun Lieder | op</hi>[.]<hi rend="italic"> 6</hi> [“6” corrected from: “5”; the whole line has been added subsequently in pencil] | <hi rend="italic">nach Gedichten von Stefan George | komponiert | von | Anton von Webern.</hi>
        </p>
        <p>The change of opus number for the “Nine Songs” (“Neun Lieder”) from “Op. 2” to “Op. 5” (for the moment) was presumably made in 1914, when the chorus <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/B4KoqjrjQ9G=proU5qmQfwN.20240706T164216979936562Z">“Entflieht auf leichten Kähnen” M 129</ref> was given the opus number “2” in Webern’s list of works. These songs were thus moved after both the string quartet compositions designated as “Op. 3”, namely <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Yh91U7HQRr=tS9=AvZ6=FgL.20240706T164223083836591Z">M 147–151</ref>, <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/EWmihye1Si=0OUqf=AyuigX.20240706T164219237846765Z">M 171–174 and M 178–180</ref>, and the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/EPKg=eIcRGO44SrOX=JpAwM.20240706T164218678674628Z">orchestral pieces M 152–157</ref>, which in the meantime actually appeared in a private print as “Op. 4”. Webern might have reordered these opus numbers when revising his compositions in late 1914 / early 1915<ptr target="#note-45" /> – possibly also with a view to the prospective publication of some of his works by Universal Edition in the second half of 1915. At some point, this collection of “Nine Songs, Op. 5” presumably included “Erwachen aus dem tiefsten Traumesschoße” M 143, which was subsequently given the designation “op[.] 5 N<hi rend="super">o</hi> 2” in <ref target="https://edition.anton-webern.ch/dev/edition/complex/m143/report#source_A">
            <hi rend="bold">A</hi>
          </ref>. It is unclear when and why the number “Op. 5” was changed to “Op. 6” on the abovementioned title page in <ref target="https://edition.anton-webern.ch/dev/edition/complex/op4/report#source_H">
            <hi rend="bold">H</hi>
          </ref> (in 1914, the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/hc0oIJblRH64d9of5jT0nQP.20240706T164226449599508Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Four Pieces for Violin and Piano</hi> M 161–164</ref> were presumably initially counted as “Op. 6”.) To what extent Webern might have altered the precise content of “some 10 songs” or his “9 songs” or “Nine songs” between 1911 and 1914 remains undocumented.</p>
        <p>In addition to Webern’s efforts to get a selection of his George songs into print, there were also repeated plans for further performances of them, after the abovementioned <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/BaY0I9oeTqakiebhj7ruugD.20230526T132843454394681Z">first performance of six songs in February 1910</ref>. An unspecified number of Webern’s songs was initially planned for inclusion in a <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/2fxIGhdRTAyjU4cRCjD8ugS.20230526T133158574514834Z">concert in Vienna on 24 April 1911</ref>, for example, though they were dropped for various reasons.<ptr target="#note-46" /> Webern temporarily considered replacing a <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/hc0oIJblRH64d9of5jT0nQP.20240706T164226449599508Z">performance of his Pieces for Violin M 161–164, planned for 29 June 1912 in Vienna</ref>, with “4 songs” instead.<ptr target="#note-47" /> And when Schoenberg had the idea of a joint “evening of compositions” by Berg and Webern in Berlin in autumn 1913, Webern thought of including several songs alongside his string quartet compositions <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Yh91U7HQRr=tS9=AvZ6=FgL.20240706T164223083836591Z">M 147–151</ref>, <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/EWmihye1Si=0OUqf=AyuigX.20240706T164219237846765Z">M 171–174 and M 178–180</ref>:</p>
        <p>And then songs by me. It would be nicest of all if <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/tlyLYvVlRyen3fEmW4mIAQi.20130201T141421Z">[Marya] Freund</ref> sang. Do you think that could be organized? I would like to send her the songs soon. May I ask you for the address of Ms Freund?<ptr target="#note-48" />
        </p>
        <p>In fact, one of the extant sources of “Dies ist ein Lied” M 133 (<ref target="https://edition.anton-webern.ch/dev/edition/complex/op3/report#source_C">
            <hi rend="bold">C</hi>
          </ref>) was found in the archives of the singer Marya Freund, who had sung the Wood Dove at the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/DTOsGKQgSEGYGO3XVKg3bAI.20230706T135525169376064Z">first performance of Schoenberg’s <hi rend="italic">Gurre-Lieder</hi> on 23 February 1913</ref>.<ptr target="#note-49" /> She was also due to sing Gustav Mahler’s <hi rend="italic">Kindertotenlieder</hi> at what later became known as the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/DTOsGKQgSEGYGO3XVKg3bAI.20230706T135525169376064Z">“Skandalkonzert” on 31 March of that same year (whose programme included the world premiere of Webern’s <hi rend="italic">Six Pieces for Large Orchestra</hi> “Op. 4” [M 152–157]</ref>), though the tumult that occurred on that evening meant that the Mahler songs were never performed.<ptr target="#note-50" /> According to a note in her archives, the autograph came into her possession in “circa 1914”.<ptr target="#note-51" /> However, she never sang the song in the context that had been envisaged because the concert programme was initially shortened,<ptr target="#note-52" /> and then the very idea of the “evening of compositions” was dropped altogether. We do not know whether Freund actually sang this song – or any George songs by Webern – on any other occasion.</p>
        <p>After the world premiere of his six songs in 1910, it is likely that Webern’s George songs were only performed again after the end of the war. These performances were closely connected with the publication of his <hi rend="italic">Five Songs from </hi>Der siebente Ring<hi rend="italic"> by Stefan George</hi>, Op. 3, by the publishing house of the Verein für musikalische Privataufführungen (the Society for Private Musical Performances) (<ref target="https://edition.anton-webern.ch/dev/edition/complex/op3/report#source_L">
            <hi rend="bold">L</hi>
          </ref>). <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/sZ9JzyC_SAy3unJ4gzsndg0.20230526T200336467265224Z">On 6 April 1919</ref>, the Verein held a concert in which <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/229V7vNzQVKQVVyHDWfBqAg.20130201T141419Z">Felicie Hüni-Mihacsek</ref> sang “Four Songs, Op. 3” accompanied by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/dO0nWhTqSmm5q6TSYpbkAQs.20230526T201818690082467Z">Eduard Steuermann</ref>, though “An Bachesranft” M 135 was subsequently inserted as the third song when they were published two months later as <hi rend="italic">Five Songs</hi>, Op. 3.<ptr target="#note-53" />
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/oNFEV2IsQ5WXX2YjTn0DoQO.20230526T133409619659697Z">On 6 June 1919, the same performers gave the world premiere of the complete collection of five songs</ref>, the score of which was also put on sale at the concert.<ptr target="#note-54" /> We know almost nothing about the production process of this publication.<ptr target="#note-55" /> The engraver’s copy [<hi rend="bold">K</hi>] has not survived, though it must have included new versions of the musical text of some of the songs that are not documented in other sources. The Verein’s two performances in April and June are likely to have used manuscript sources containing earlier versions of the musical text; if not, then the copies in question have also not survived.<ptr target="#note-56" /> Print <ref target="https://edition.anton-webern.ch/dev/edition/complex/op3/report#source_L">
            <hi rend="bold">L</hi>
          </ref> was completed only a few days before the second performance of June 1919,<ptr target="#note-57" /> and contains the following songs:</p>
        <p>I    “Dies ist ein Lied” M 133 (version 4)</p>
        <p>II   “Im Windesweben” M 134 (version 3)</p>
        <p>III  “An Bachesranft” M 135 (version 3)</p>
        <p>IV  “Im Morgentaun” M 136 (version 3)</p>
        <p>V   “Kahl reckt der Baum” M 137 (version 5)</p>
        <p>Webern finally concluded a contract with Universal Edition in August 1920, signing over the rights to his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/fcgOtGhnQMW3cH0Ddrd_Og_.20240706T164225097044107Z">Op. 1</ref> (Passacaglia M 127), <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/B4KoqjrjQ9G=proU5qmQfwN.20240706T164216979936562Z">Op. 2</ref> (“Entflieht auf leichten Kähnen” M 129), Op. 3 (George songs M 133–137) and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/EPKg=eIcRGO44SrOX=JpAwM.20240706T164218678674628Z">Op. 6</ref> (<hi rend="italic">Pieces for Orchestra</hi> M 152–157), and Universal subsequently also took on the remaining copies of the edition of the <hi rend="italic">Five Songs from </hi>Der siebente Ring<hi rend="italic"> by Stefan George</hi>, Op. 3, that had been printed by the Verein in 1919.<ptr target="#note-58" />
        </p>
        <p>For the publication of his <hi rend="italic">Five Songs on Poems of Stefan George</hi>, Op. 4, Webern had a copy, <hi rend="bold">I</hi>, made of the versions of the songs contained in his autograph fair copy <hi rend="bold">H</hi>. It is unclear just when he had this done, though it was presumably not long after he signed the contract for the work in April 1923.<ptr target="#note-59" /> Print <hi rend="bold">J</hi> was published in August 1923 and contains the following songs:</p>
        <p>I     <hi rend="italic">Eingang</hi> (“Welt der Gestalten”) M 138 (version 3)</p>
        <p>II   “Noch zwingt mich Treue” M 139 (version 3)</p>
        <p>III  “Ja Heil und Dank dir” M 140 (version 2)</p>
        <p>IV  “So ich traurig bin” M 141 (version 2)</p>
        <p>V   “Ihr tratet zu dem Herde” M 142 (version 3)</p>
        <p>The <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/zA8MiJSxTNC8NjavQyFXtQh.20240507T15252944409618Z">world premiere of the Five Songs on Poems of Stefan George, Op. 4</ref>, was given by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/5evNWSVVRV=eFl2Dw6x1EwY.20240507T152904817631725Z">Jenny Jungbauer</ref> und <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/MSetm2ihRkyKb_GpCwVDEAx.20240507T153730821948699Z">Ilse Fromm-Michaels</ref> on 23 November 1923 in Hamburg at a cycle of concerts entitled “New Music” that was organized by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/0PDraSNuT8=_WT6C8tpZ5gp.20240507T134915656624186Z">Josef Rufer</ref> und <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/BcK4HDnpToSxFrCrJBSUnA3.20240808T1346055010363Z">Hans Heinz Stuckenschmidt</ref>. Webern was presumably not in attendance, nor had he been involved in preparations for the performance.<ptr target="#note-60" />
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/1GdSoIKASUKNovRprwKihwB.20230526T15413085034697Z">The complete collection of Op. 4 was performed in Webern’s presence only on 10 February 1940 in Basel</ref> in a concert of the International Society for Contemporary Music (hereinafter ISCM) featuring <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/tsWHLWd7QvaNdKoR=MZeDAe.20231128T131952684964307Z">Marguerite Gradmann-Lüscher</ref> accompanied by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/qMCFngv3R_qn1VLSZKbPawh.20130201T141420Z">Erich Schmid</ref>, at which they also performed three of Webern’s <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12, alongside songs by Schoenberg and Berg.<ptr target="#note-61" />
        </p>
        <p>As in the latter case, further performances of Webern’s George songs during his lifetime often took place in various combinations comprising selections from the published collections Opp. 3 and 4 and the <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12. In addition to the performances already mentioned from the years 1910, 1919 (the world premiere of Op. 3) and 1923 (the world premiere of Op. 4), we currently have documentary evidence of the following:</p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/MTckoKrlQjuo63pcfXMiIAT.20230526T214750265461303Z">20 November 1922, Prague, Verein für musikalische Privataufführungen</ref>, Felicie Hüni-Mihacsek and Eduard Steuermann: <hi rend="italic">Five Songs from </hi>Der siebente Ring<hi rend="italic"> by Stefan George</hi>, Op. 3.<ptr target="#note-62" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/0tjlVh0tT=a3jTOBe1_DywV.20201029T101142Z">17 January 1925, Paris, Revue musicale</ref>, <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/aPjdxg0SSnyAUMaHQCS_uQa.20130201T141420Z">Ruzena Herlinger</ref> and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/tnrPEmghRZejLt6n_YZ3Xw1.20150427T123034Z">Ernst Bachrich</ref>: Op. 3/1, 3/2, 3/3.<ptr target="#note-63" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Lkxch0_VSxGNtAld1rx=uAm.20230526T190025308613279Z">26 October 1928, London, Wigmore Hall</ref>, Ruzena Herlinger and Eduard Steuermann: Opp. 3/1, 3/2, 3/5, 12/1 and 12/4.<ptr target="#note-64" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/QkNkF9wqQIWz4FWv443tfAo.20111118T235100Z">25 October 1929, Brussels, Palais des Beaux-Arts</ref>, Ruzena Herlinger and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/JqYy8tZ9TxiiV1TNKjqcQAr.20240808T135123531367332Z">Stefan Askenase</ref>: songs from Opp. 4 and 12.<ptr target="#note-65" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/8Q7jKkm8RoSLg=fe4wJgIQg.20230526T143727259548116Z">13 April 1931, Vienna, Small Hall of the Musikverein</ref>, <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/HP=wOs6YS6yGQjYYrWwjJAJ.20171114T124124Z">Aenne Michalsky</ref> and Eduard Steuermann: Opp. 4/1, 3/1, 3/2, 3/5, 12/1 and 12/4.<ptr target="#note-66" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/QDpv9tPJSsem_Yq8=5WXZAl.20230526T232542804100399Z">18 November 1931, Amsterdam</ref>, <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/uKFIiHn6RGeQoP4Nb=99=An.20230526T232623433421061Z">Berthe Seroen</ref> and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/74q9bqlCSPuIikGgRmR7NQW.20201214T081729Z">Phons Dusch</ref>: Opp. 3/1, 3/3, 12/2.<ptr target="#note-67" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/iC5g4PHfRKSWXwVi8Vb12g2.20230526T144926011817175Z">2 December 1933, Vienna, Small Hall of the Musikverein</ref> (Concert of the ISCM on the occasion of Webern’s 60<hi rend="super">th</hi> birthday), Aenne Michalsky and Eduard Steuermann: songs from Opp. 3, 4 and 12.<ptr target="#note-68" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/IlPYvEQiRweaMnNsyUfkCwn.20111118T235102Z">17 December 1934, Vienna, Ehrbar Hall</ref>, Felicie Hüni-Mihacsek and Eduard Steuermann: <hi rend="italic">Five Songs from </hi>Der siebente Ring<hi rend="italic"> by Stefan George</hi>, Op. 3.<ptr target="#note-69" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/1GdSoIKASUKNovRprwKihwB.20230526T15413085034697Z">10 February 1940, Basel, Conservatory</ref> (Concert of the ISCM, Basel Section), Marguerite Gradmann-Lüscher and Erich Schmid: <hi rend="italic">Five Songs on Poems of Stefan George</hi>, Op. 4 and Op. 12/2, 12/4 and 12/1.<ptr target="#note-70" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/tzIJJyTXSySOkpoPooa3fAw.20230526T19422666189774Z">28 March 1941, Zurich, guild house “Zur Saffran”</ref> (concert of the ISCM, Zurich Section “Pro Musica”), Marguerite Gradmann-Lüscher and Erich Schmid: Five George songs plus three songs from Op. 12.<ptr target="#note-71" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/YqAC8rgdQf6Egg=G6XpAaAt.20230526T154815742910429Z">5 December 1943, Basel, Conservatory</ref>, Marguerite Gradmann-Lüscher and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/IHAK7=ESSKmigjTWgDhmhwa.20171124T083908Z">Paul Baumgartner</ref>: <hi rend="italic">Five Songs from </hi>Der siebente Ring<hi rend="italic"> by Stefan George</hi>, Op. 3.<ptr target="#note-72" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern had personal contact with most of these performers, and in some cases he also assisted when they rehearsed his songs. In his personal copy of the <hi rend="italic">Five Songs on Poems of Stefan George</hi>, Op. 4 (<hi rend="bold">J<hi rend="super">H</hi>
          </hi>), we find various annotations pertaining to performances, and indications of durations. It is impossible to prove whether or not these are connected with one of the abovementioned performances (though perhaps with the first performance of the entire collection in Basel in 1940).</p>
      </div>
      <div xml:id="op12">
        <head>Four Songs, Op. 12</head>
        <p>The dates of composition of the individual continuity drafts for the <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12 can be divided into two clearly separate phases. Webern initially composed “Der Tag ist vergangen” M 212 and “Schien mir’s, als ich sah die Sonne” M 213 in early 1915; in the spring of 1917, he wrote <hi rend="italic">Gleich und Gleich</hi> M 216 and <hi rend="italic">Die geheimnisvolle Flöte</hi> M 217. Both of these phases occurred during a creative period that lasted from ca 1914 to the mid-1920s that was notable for Webern’s having concentrated on vocal composition, especially works for solo voice with ensemble accompaniment, most of which were published from 1924 onwards in his Opp. 13–19 (cf. AWG I/4). The genesis of the <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12 should also be seen in this context. Since they were composed for voice and piano, the present edition has assigned them to AWG Section I/5.</p>
        <p>The gap of more than two years that occurred during the composition of the songs of Op. 12 was a result of a radical historical caesura: the First World War. When it broke out in late July 1914, it also forced Webern to change all his hitherto plans. He had been appointed as a conductor to various theatres from 1909 onwards, but had suffered repeated health problems, and so had undergone therapy with the psychoanalyst <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/3OP=l0fkQLCi=v0E_dnLZgB.20150427T091115Z">Alfred Adler</ref> from August to October 1913. After this, Webern once more felt in a condition to be able to assume conducting duties. He had accordingly accepted such a position in Stettin (today Szczecin in Poland) for the summer of 1914, but this engagement was cancelled because of the war. Webern was initially enthusiastic about the onset of war, and now sought to enrol in the military instead. However, his age and state of health meant that he was not called up until November 1914. In February 1915, he was stationed first in Klagenfurt and then in Gorizia as part of a “one-year” training course.<ptr target="#note-73" /> Apart from several brief interruptions, Webern remained in military service until the end of 1916.</p>
        <p>The two songs with piano that Webern composed in January 1915 were the first compositions that he completed after the beginning of the war, and the only works that he completed before being deployed. Webern had written to <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/KfaVxMixRK=UTqPAs5xQcgt.20230526T211228012951052Z">Heinrich Jalowetz</ref> in mid-December 1914, saying that he had “begun something again”,<ptr target="#note-74" /> and reported to him once more on 10 January about his continuing productivity – a few days before dating his continuity draft for “Der Tag ist vergangen” M 212 in <hi rend="bold">A</hi> (13 January 1915): “I am now writing something new again, i. e. I’m really only just getting down to it.”<ptr target="#note-75" />
        </p>
        <p>The text for “Der Tag ist vergangen” M 212 was taken from <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/jikQm8p5QzenovD0O6OL3g2.20171124T185004Z">Peter Rosegger’s</ref> novel <hi rend="italic">Peter Mayr, der Wirt an der Mahr. Eine Geschichte aus deutscher Heldenzeit</hi>.<ptr target="#note-76" /> This book is about a historical figure from the so-called Tyrolean freedom struggles after 1805 whose crises of conscience are depicted as akin to the martyrdom of a saint. He is torn between his social and religious longings for peace on the one hand and his efforts to help attain political and national emancipation on the other. Webern had read the book in early 1915, as can be seen from his letter to <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Y1=4oD0OTZqzzOQM=H9ywA_.20230526T214948203842794Z">Arnold Schoenberg</ref> of 9 January in which he quotes a lengthy passage from it about a revelatory religious experience.<ptr target="#note-77" /> However, Rosegger had already been of great importance to Webern since 1912 at the latest, as is especially clear from the numerous times that Webern mentions him in his letters to <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Pkd2nTOqRkWsOdSNXSsJVA2.20230526T215003568534358Z">Alban Berg</ref> and Schoenberg.<ptr target="#note-78" /> Besides Webern’s interest in the religious sphere evoked in the book, its nationalistic tenor might well have corresponded to his own euphoria for the war after its outbreak in mid-1914. In this two-strophe poem (which in older editions of the novel was published as four strophes), Rosegger uses formulae from traditional, popular songs of pilgrimage.<ptr target="#note-79" /> He situates his poem in an evening scene of an act of military resistance disguised as a mass pilgrimage, in which several pilgrims sing the “melancholy notes of this song” with “bright voices”.</p>
        <p>Webern presumably made the fair copy of version 1 of “Der Tag ist vergangen” M 212 in <hi rend="bold">B</hi> shortly after the dated continuity draft. It is impossible to determine precisely when he made the revisions in <hi rend="bold">A</hi> and <hi rend="bold">B</hi> and the resulting copy of version 2 in <hi rend="bold">C</hi>. Nevertheless, the red ink that he used for the text underlay in both <hi rend="bold">B</hi> and <hi rend="bold">C</hi> as well as the cursive script indicate that they were all made at a similar time, presumably before Webern was stationed in Klagenfurt. In any case, version 2 served as the engraver’s copy for the single print of “Der Tag ist vergangen” M 212 in the <hi rend="italic">Musikblätter des Anbruch</hi> in May 1922 (<hi rend="bold">E</hi>).<ptr target="#note-80" /> When it was to be published in the collection <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12 (<hi rend="bold">G</hi>) in 1925, Webern made his own engraver’s copy (version 3 in <hi rend="bold">F</hi>). As with many of his other settings of Rosegger’s texts, Webern refrained here from indicating the author in all the copies and prints of this song. In his <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12, he identifies it as a “folk song”.</p>
        <p>In a letter to Schoenberg dated 21 January 1915, Webern tells him he has completed a “song with piano” (presumably “Der Tag ist vergangen” M 212) and mentions that he has “begun” two other songs.<ptr target="#note-81" /> One of these might have been “Schien mir’s, als ich sah die Sonne” M 213, whose continuity draft in <hi rend="bold">A</hi> is dated 31 January 1915 (the second song was presumably the Trakl setting <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/x=Zd_SXqTtSUGAxZX1mYEgj.20230526T183404221726321Z">“In der Heimat” M 214</ref>, which remained unfinished).</p>
        <p>The text of “Schien mir’s, als ich sah die Sonne” M 213 was taken from <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/CX7gZrVOSbS1Kh3tmw2f1wr.20200715T051825Z">August Strindberg’s</ref> play <hi rend="italic">Ghost Sonata </hi>(whose original Swedish title was <hi rend="italic">Spöksonaten</hi>). A copy of the German translation by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/6cNRnDkRQ7O1BCxtXmNbhwd.20240306T085307291288676Z">Emil Schering</ref> has been preserved in Webern’s library that bears the autograph date “2. VII[.] 09.” (which was <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/H8K9PrKCTemdX5K7OH=TIAa.20230526T190059710647045Z">Wilhelmine Mörtl’s</ref> 23<hi rend="super">rd</hi> birthday).<ptr target="#note-82" /> Webern had already discovered Strindberg’s works in 1908, after which this author played a decisive role in his communications with both Schoenberg and Berg.<ptr target="#note-83" /> The poem in question appears twice as a song in Schering’s edition of the play: at the close of the second act, and shortly before the end of the third and final act, when the (fatal) exchange between the “Student” and the “Young Lady” takes place. The song is sung by the Student, who is accompanied the first time by the Young Lady “on a harp”, while the second time, after the death of the Young Lady, it “whispers in the strings of the harp”.</p>
        <p>Webern had already begun a setting of this poem in a short sketch for women’s and children’s chorus <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/rK77Bd=hQ3aYcTHsV1Lp_QL.20230526T183105429276571Z">(“Schien mir’s, als ich sah die Sonne” M 198</ref>), which he dated “Winter 1913/1914” (though this date was presumably added later). This sketch, however, never proceeded beyond the first line. The copy of the song with piano “Schien mir’s als ich sah die Sonne” M 213 in <hi rend="bold">C</hi> was based on the continuity draft in <hi rend="bold">A</hi> and bears numerous traces of having been revised. It is not possible, however, to discern the musical text unambiguously as it existed before those corrections. The use of cursive script and of the same red ink for the text underlay that we find in the copies of “Der Tag ist vergangen” M 212 in <hi rend="bold">B</hi> and <hi rend="bold">C</hi> suggests that the basic layer of “Schien mir’s als ich sah die Sonne” M 213 was written at roughly the same time. It is therefore possible that it was also composed before Webern was stationed in Klagenfurt in February 1915.</p>
        <p>No compositional efforts of Webern’s have survived from his time in the military in 1915 and 1916. He wrote to Jalowetz as follows in January 1917:</p>
        <p>I’m now recovering gradually from these 2 years – mentally. Only now can I really feel the effect. I’m slowly getting back on track, finding my way. I’m gradually remembering what I’d been thinking before, and where I had reached.<ptr target="#note-84" />
        </p>
        <p>The first composition that Webern completed after his two years in the military was <hi rend="italic">Gleich und Gleich</hi> M 216, whose continuity draft in <hi rend="bold">A</hi> is dated 31 March 1917. This was only Webern’s second-ever setting of <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/A900JucRTfSQMVod9ZAVxgU.20230526T201505214336644Z">Goethe</ref>, after his song with piano <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/5FBWQUVvQEeF_LdbwcvBBQF.20240226T151122525368441Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Blumengruß </hi>M 20</ref>
          <ptr target="#note-85" /> of 1903. We have no details of Webern’s Goethe reception before 1917, though we do find sporadic mentions of his having read the poet.<ptr target="#note-86" /> According to the handwritten list of books and scores that Webern began keeping in the 1910s, he owned the following edition of Goethe: <hi rend="italic">Sämtliche Werke. Jubiläumsausgabe</hi> in 40 volumes, Stuttgart and Berlin: Cotta, [1902–1912].<ptr target="#note-87" /> Further traces of his compositional engagement with Goethe’s works during these years can be found in two further sketches/fragments from 1917 (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Iad5RMzHTSWaG7A8nkGCRAo.20230526T18352981413229Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Gegenwart</hi> for voice [baritone?] and piano M 220</ref>) and 1918 (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/KWCCltXaRh6BKVchNHaK6go.20230526T183855049284873Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Cirrus</hi> for voice and orchestra M 235</ref>).<ptr target="#note-88" />
        </p>
        <p>Version 1 of <hi rend="italic">Gleich und Gleich</hi> M 216 fully notated in <hi rend="bold">C</hi> presumably dates from shortly after the continuity draft. It reveals changes that point to version 2 in <hi rend="bold">F</hi>, which was prepared for the song’s publication in 1925. Another, unrevised copy of version 1, found in <hi rend="bold">D</hi>, can be confirmed as postdating <hi rend="bold">C</hi>, not least because its text underlay is written in Latin script. However, we do not know the precise date when this version was committed to paper, nor why it was made. The designation “Op. 12” in its title suggests that its earliest possible date is some time after April 1920 (see below).</p>
        <p>In one of his later lectures, “Wege zur neuen Musik” (“Paths to New Music”) of early 1932, Webern mentions the introductory measures of <hi rend="italic">Gleich und Gleich</hi> M 216 as an example of his having already grasped intuitively the principles of later twelve-tone composition, since they present all twelve pitch classes of the chromatic scale. “The law was not yet known to us back then, but it had long been felt.”<ptr target="#note-89" /> The next Goethe settings that Webern completed, the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/X3I325HFSoifFQT6_Wl=5Q_.20230526T190047286959807Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Two Songs for Mixed Chorus</hi>, Op. 19</ref>, only date from 1925/26. They are among his first explicitly twelve-tone compositions and are also the last settings of Goethe that he ever completed.</p>
        <p>The continuity draft of <hi rend="italic">Die geheimnisvolle Flöte</hi> M 217 in <hi rend="bold">A</hi> is dated 10 April 1917, thus immediately after Webern had completed <hi rend="italic">Gleich und Gleich</hi> M 216 (though his letters of this time to Berg, Jalowetz and Schoenberg mention neither of these works). The text he set in <hi rend="italic">Die geheimnisvolle Flöte</hi> is a free adaptation of a poem by the Chinese writer Li Tai-po (today more commonly referred to as <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/WytoXSEvQwCp=u2yr1FWBgb.20230706T155025587893118Z">Li Bai</ref>), taken from <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/LvNJplkTRoSNUkB2afXUVgX.20200728T054520Z">Hans Bethge’s</ref> collection <hi rend="italic">Die chinesische Flöte </hi>(<hi rend="italic">The Chinese Flute</hi>), which was first published in 1907. The copy of the fourth edition of this book that has survived in Webern’s library bears the handwritten date “3. 12. 12.” (thus 3 December 1912, his 29<hi rend="super">th</hi> birthday) on the reverse of the front cover.<ptr target="#note-90" /> Webern will have been aware of several poems from this collection at least one year previously, as <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/pJS0OXy0T46lCURGlZZpIAz.20160718T081028Z">Gustav Mahler</ref> had set them in his <hi rend="italic">Lied von der Erde</hi>, whose world premiere Webern had attended on 20 November 1911 in Munich.<ptr target="#note-91" /> Webern composed <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/6dJyTbe=Sz=CdEmcnIbl6g9.20230526T183124974244057Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Die </hi>
            <hi rend="italic">Einsame</hi> M 199</ref> from <hi rend="italic">Die chinesische Flöte</hi> for voice and orchestra in February 1914, and followed this in July 1917 with <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/IJbwG7o2QkOtDuR1vzotjwD.20230526T183629661140645Z">
            <hi rend="italic">In der Fremde</hi> M 223</ref>, later including both these songs in his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/0tsgPZdBQcmAItRTCRwx6QX.20240205T07555309971419Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Four Songs for Voice and Orchestra</hi>, Op. 13</ref>. Two more unfinished sketches by Webern have survived that use texts from <hi rend="italic">Die chinesische Flöte</hi>: <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/302wVoe8S7CqsV7HwYa=AQ3.20230526T183833823877354Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Nächtliches Bild</hi> M 233</ref> (from autumn 1918) and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RyeV8JipRySQ9DEXNrYt2wi.20230526T184037076583541Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Der Frühlingsregen</hi> M 244</ref> (probably from 1920).</p>
        <p>The basic layer of the copy in <hi rend="bold">C</hi> of <hi rend="italic">Die geheimnisvolle Flöte</hi> M 217 (version “0”) can no longer be deciphered clearly. However, as in the case of <hi rend="italic">Gleich und Gleich</hi> M 216, also in <hi rend="bold">C</hi>, it was probably written shortly after the continuity draft and contains alterations in ink and pencil. Together with an intermediate stage that also cannot be determined with any clarity, these changes might have been pointing towards version 1 found in <hi rend="bold">F</hi>, which was made with a view to publishing the song in 1925.</p>
        <p>It was in 1920 at the latest when Webern brought together these four songs with piano to form a collection with an opus number. It was presumably sometime after April 1920 that Webern drew up a handwritten list of his works for <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/xiy9FauqRQqVl_dsLWMYVQz.20250204T110725416877022Z">Universal Edition</ref> in which he designated these as “4 Songs with Piano” and gave them the number “Op. 10”.<ptr target="#note-92" /> This is the number that they were originally given on the cover page of source <hi rend="bold">C</hi>, though this was later deleted and corrected to “Op. 12”.<ptr target="#note-93" /> This change was made no earlier than the beginning of 1921, when Webern was busy numbering other works. In an article published by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/rc84pCTZQFyfXvQGnidRlgF.20230526T211246314746391Z">Egon Wellesz</ref> in February 1921, these songs are explicitly mentioned as being Webern’s “opus 12”.<ptr target="#note-94" /> The music examples given in this article were prepared on the basis of version 2 of “Der Tag ist vergangen” M 212 and version 1 of <hi rend="italic">Gleich und Gleich</hi> M 216, and thus presumably used <hi rend="bold">C</hi> as their source (or possibly <hi rend="bold">D</hi> in the case of M 216 in the corresponding stage of corrections). In May 1922, version 2 of “Der Tag ist vergangen” M 212 was published separately (though with a remark that it belonged to Op. 12) as a music supplement to the <hi rend="italic">Musikblätter des Anbruch</hi> (<hi rend="bold">E</hi>). Webern revised his personal copy of “Der Tag ist vergangen” M 212, <hi rend="bold">E<hi rend="super">H</hi>
          </hi>, resulting in version 3, and he revised <hi rend="italic">Gleich und Gleich</hi> M 216 in <hi rend="bold">C</hi>, resulting in version 2 of the song. By the turn of the year 1924/25 at the latest, Webern had produced an engraver’s copy, <hi rend="bold">F</hi>, of his <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12, which he then offered to Universal Edition in a letter of 3 January 1925 to its director, <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/u8SZfSTaRBGpPokzmC9nuAP.20150421T105405Z">Emil Hertzka</ref>, in which he mentioned it as being one of the works he “currently had ‘in stock’”. He clearly submitted the work to them shortly afterwards.<ptr target="#note-95" /> On 12 June of that year, he sent the second proofs of the engraved music back to his publisher, and on 20 June he returned the proof of the title page.<ptr target="#note-96" /> Print <hi rend="bold">G</hi> of the <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12 was published on 30 September 1925 in an edition of 499 copies.<ptr target="#note-97" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern received an enthusiastic reaction from Alban Berg, who wrote to him just a few days after these songs were published:</p>
        <p>What great pleasure you have given me, my dear, with your Op. 12! This is once again – just like everything by you – a real Webern. Even the way you have compiled the wonderful texts and have brought them together into a single whole! Not to mention the music! Yes, it seems to me as if I were to see you in a completely new way. What a tone you strike in the Strindberg song. And overall, what variety there is in these 4 songs. The last one, for example: such gracefulness. One can safely say that we will not find this anywhere else in the whole music repertoire –: such a song by you is for me a veritable fount of joy, a joy that shines out over my whole being. It’s like when the sun suddenly bursts forth on a gloomy day, and you just don’t know why you suddenly feel happy again.<ptr target="#note-98" />
        </p>
        <p>The <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/ncab0O0TQdeKs=MKDFoX=Qc.20230602T093729719873208Z">world premiere of Webern’s Op. 12 in its entirety took place on 8 January 1927 in the small hall of the Vienna Musikverein</ref>, sung by the Dutch singer <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/m21nVGTUTNGuSUU0YmciYQc.20130201T141421Z">Co van Geuns</ref> with <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/dO0nWhTqSmm5q6TSYpbkAQs.20230526T201818690082467Z">Eduard Steuermann</ref> at the piano. The same concert saw the world premiere of Alban Berg’s <hi rend="italic">Lyric Suite</hi>, performed by the Vienna String Quartet (the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/hSBoov15RAWBZtHvXtFpfgv.20250130T132308295626946Z">Kolisch Quartet</ref>), plus a performance under Webern’s baton of <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/awxdbT2CRNOgsVZxQEu9Jgt.20200902T070155Z">Johann Sebastian Bach’s</ref> Concerto for Four Pianos BWV 1065.<ptr target="#note-99" /> Webern wrote to Schoenberg a few days later, offering a succinct commentary on the performance of his songs: “On the same evening as Berg’s quartet, a song opus of mine was also given its first performance. It went very well.”<ptr target="#note-100" /> The <hi rend="italic">Arbeiter-Zeitung </hi>afterwards featured a positive review of the concert in which it placed Berg’s work in the foreground and offered a comparatively brief report of Webern’s <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12:</p>
        <p>New songs by Anton  W e b e r n, which Co van  G e u n s  sang with exceptional musicality, led by Eduard  S t e u e r m a n n  at the piano, were also a great success. Here, brief lyrical poems are pressed into musical forms whose composition cannot be clear to the impartial listener. So he must hold on to the expressive values that can be found here in abundance, even if the strange course of the singing voice makes it difficult to follow all the time. The songs had to be repeated and this made them easier to understand.<ptr target="#note-101" />
        </p>
        <p>According to a diary entry by Webern, <hi rend="italic">Gleich und Gleich</hi> M 216 had already been sung by a “Dutch [woman] singer” in October 1926,<ptr target="#note-102" /> presumably also van Geuns, who also performed songs by Webern (probably also from Op. 12) and by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/GwIvlipuTGuJsf1rj=YEhgw.20150427T094535Z">Alexander Zemlinsky</ref> in Cologne sometime after the world premiere of the <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12 of early January 1927.<ptr target="#note-103" /> As with the George songs, several performances during Webern’s lifetime (probably with his consent or even at his suggestion) took place at which only a selection of the <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12 was sung, or at which selected songs from that opus were combined with individual numbers from the George songs Opp. 3 and 4. Apart from the performances with van Geuns already mentioned above, we have proof of the following concerts having taken place:</p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Lkxch0_VSxGNtAld1rx=uAm.20230526T190025308613279Z">26 October 1928, London, Wigmore Hall</ref>, <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/aPjdxg0SSnyAUMaHQCS_uQa.20130201T141420Z">Ruzena Herlinger</ref> and Eduard Steuermann: Opp. 3/1, 3/2, 3/5, 12/1 and 12/4.<ptr target="#note-104" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/QkNkF9wqQIWz4FWv443tfAo.20111118T235100Z">25 October 1929, Brussels, Palais des Beaux-Arts</ref>, Ruzena Herlinger and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/JqYy8tZ9TxiiV1TNKjqcQAr.20240808T135123531367332Z">Stefan Askenase</ref>: songs from Opp. 4 and 12.<ptr target="#note-105" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/8Q7jKkm8RoSLg=fe4wJgIQg.20230526T143727259548116Z">13 April 1931, Vienna, Small Hall of the Musikverein</ref>, <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/HP=wOs6YS6yGQjYYrWwjJAJ.20171114T124124Z">Aenne Michalsky</ref> and Eduard Steuermann: Opp. 4/1, 3/1, 3/2, 3/5, 12/1 and 12/4.<ptr target="#note-106" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/QDpv9tPJSsem_Yq8=5WXZAl.20230526T232542804100399Z">18 November 1931, Amsterdam</ref>, <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/uKFIiHn6RGeQoP4Nb=99=An.20230526T232623433421061Z">Berthe Seroen</ref> and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/74q9bqlCSPuIikGgRmR7NQW.20201214T081729Z">Phons Dusch</ref>: Opp. 3/1, 3/3, 12/2.<ptr target="#note-107" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/iC5g4PHfRKSWXwVi8Vb12g2.20230526T144926011817175Z">2 December 1933, Vienna, Small Hall of the Musikverein</ref> (Concert of the ISCM on the occasion of Webern’s 60<hi rend="super">th</hi> birthday), Aenne Michalsky and Eduard Steuermann: songs from Opp. 3, 4 and 12.<ptr target="#note-108" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Yxolmc8HSzKnQEbhXk3W9QE.20111118T235102Z">9 May 1935, Vienna, Musikverein</ref> (a concert of the Hertzka Memorial Foundation), <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/uyYCI5XISOCTnLbb1aMNQQM.20200520T095844Z">Julia Nessy</ref> (voice): <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12.<ptr target="#note-109" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/YlmTAzngTI2LKQAim6yIlwn.20230526T150250683807671Z">21 November 1935, Vienna, Hagenbund</ref> (Concert of the Verein für neue Musik), Julia Nessy (voice): <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12.<ptr target="#note-110" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/1GdSoIKASUKNovRprwKihwB.20230526T15413085034697Z">10 February 1940, Basel, Conservatory</ref> (Concert of the ISCM, Basel Section), <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/tsWHLWd7QvaNdKoR=MZeDAe.20231128T131952684964307Z">Marguerite Gradmann-Lüscher</ref> and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/qMCFngv3R_qn1VLSZKbPawh.20130201T141420Z">Erich Schmid</ref>: <hi rend="italic">Five Songs on Poems of Stefan George</hi>, Op. 4 and Op. 12/2, 12/4 and 12/1.<ptr target="#note-111" />
        </p>
        <p>–  <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/tzIJJyTXSySOkpoPooa3fAw.20230526T19422666189774Z">28 March 1941, Zurich, guild house “Zur Saffran”</ref> (concert of the ISCM, Zurich Section “Pro Musica”), Marguerite Gradmann-Lüscher and Erich Schmid: Five George songs plus three songs from Op. 12.<ptr target="#note-112" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern had personal contact with most of these performers, and in some cases he also assisted when they rehearsed his songs. In his personal copy of the <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12 (<hi rend="bold">G<hi rend="super">H</hi>
          </hi>), we find indications of the durations of the individual songs. We do not know if these were made in connection with any of the performances listed above.</p>
      </div>
      <div xml:id="op23">
        <head>Three Songs from <hi rend="italic">Viae inviae</hi> by Hildegard Jone, Op. 23</head>
        <p>The <hi rend="italic">Three Songs from </hi>Viae inviae <hi rend="italic">by Hildegard Jone</hi>, Op. 23, which Webern began in early 1933 and completed in March 1934, were his first songs with piano accompaniment to use the method of “composing with twelve tones” – as Webern usually referred to it – and they were also the first vocal work that he had completed since his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/X3I325HFSoifFQT6_Wl=5Q_.20240605T101959330743084Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Two Songs for Mixed Chorus with the Accompaniment of Celeste, Guitar, Violin, Clarinet and Bass Clarinet</hi>, Op. 19</ref>, composed between late 1925 and the summer of 1926. Webern’s title uses the term “Gesang” for “song”, not “Lied”, which serves as an indication of the extended length of the individual songs when compared to most of his other vocal works. These were also Webern’s first compositions to texts by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/57rWS6x6SuGhLsZ3lFlP2AX.20230706T153331654899123Z">Hildegard Jone</ref>, whose poetry provided him with the basis for all the vocal works that he subsequently completed.</p>
        <p>Webern presumably first met Jone and her husband, the sculptor <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/HCLb8JygShOaXx_p9FTU0gE.20130201T141418Z">Josef Humplik</ref>, in autumn 1926 at an exhibition of the Hagenbund in Vienna. This acquaintance led to plans for a collaboration between Webern and Jone by 1928 at the latest,<ptr target="#note-113" /> and resulted in Jone writing “three opera texts”.<ptr target="#note-114" /> A letter exists from Webern to Jone, written over a year later, in which he wrote that he wanted “to talk about your dramas”,<ptr target="#note-115" /> though it remains unclear whether he is referring to the aforementioned three libretti or to other texts by Jone. However, it does seem that Jone still intended to “write [...] a ‘libretto’” for Webern.<ptr target="#note-116" /> We know that Webern wrote to Jone in September 1930 to apologize</p>
        <p>that your dramas, which are so beautiful, had obviously not found me in the right state of mind for such work, despite the fact that I was very serious at the time about composing such things.<ptr target="#note-117" />
        </p>
        <p>Instead, he goes on to ask her in this letter to write him a cantata text.<ptr target="#note-118" /> Nevertheless, we do not know of any poems by Jone from this same time that might be connected to this request on the part of the composer (as is well known, Webern did indeed compose “cantatas” to texts by Jone, but only between 1935 and 1943; these were <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/wE1RDgEzSqSszu7eLv3EMwc.20240706T164229302542901Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Das Augenlicht</hi>, Op. 26</ref>, the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/xypqVOTnRuCzxu2YxF4chwc.20240706T164229579022199Z">Cantata No. 1, Op. 29</ref> and the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/wFuGrX48QMWW=DjOObGI0QO.20130310T105428Z">Cantata No. 2, Op. 31</ref>). Quite apart from such concrete proposals for a possible collaboration, Jone repeatedly sent Webern manuscripts of her poems.<ptr target="#note-119" />
        </p>
        <p>Given this background, it is worthy of note that Webern first set one of Jones’s poems without any prior consultation with the poet, having taken it instead from an already published collection: <hi rend="italic">Viae inviae</hi>, which was published in the autumn of 1932 in the journal <hi rend="italic">Der Brenner</hi>.<ptr target="#note-120" /> This cycle of poems was dedicated posthumously to the philosopher <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/jVPchLn_TUqqOddL==CSHgt.20170525T074900Z">Ferdinand Ebner</ref>, who had died in October 1931, and whose <hi rend="italic">Fragment von 1916</hi> (together with an “afterword” to it that he wrote shortly before his death) precedes Jone’s collection of poems in that issue of the journal.<ptr target="#note-121" /> Shortly before Ebner died, Jone had arranged for Webern to meet him in person.<ptr target="#note-122" /> And even before that, Jone had repeatedly confronted Webern with Ebner’s ideas, and she in fact later remained active as his editor. Webern’s explicit engagement with Ebner’s writings can only be traced sporadically, from 1934 onwards. Nevertheless, we can discern an implicit reception of Ebner’s work on Webern’s part through Jone’s texts.<ptr target="#note-123" /> The poems of <hi rend="italic">Viae inviae</hi> are divided into two sections, each marked with a Roman numeral: Section I begins with a prologue entitled <hi rend="italic">Dem einsamen Wanderer</hi> (“To the Lonely Wayfarer”) and contains within it the cycle <hi rend="italic">Heimgang des Lebens</hi> (“Life’s Homecoming”), which is subdivided into three further sections, each with an Arabic numeral.<ptr target="#note-124" /> The texts that Webern set to music in his Op. 23 are the third section of <hi rend="italic">Heimgang des Lebens</hi>, which itself is divided into eight groups of verses of varying lengths. Webern’s three songs comprise verse groups 1–4 (“Das dunkle Herz…”), 5–6 (“Es stürzt aus Höhen…”) and 7–8 (“Herr Jesus mein…”). He did not compose them in the same order in which they appear in the source, though when the songs were complete, he kept their original order.</p>
        <p>The initial sketches for Op. 23 in <hi rend="bold">A</hi> (Sketchbook 3) are dated “1. II. 33” and are for “Herr Jesus mein” M 312 (<hi rend="bold">M 312 Sk1</hi>, <hi rend="bold">M 312 Sk1.1</hi> and <hi rend="bold">M 312 Sk2</hi>), i. e. the last two verse groups of the third section of <hi rend="italic">Heimgang des Lebens</hi>. Webern sketched out a vocal line for the first words of the poem and then developed a twelve-note row from it. In the sketchbook in question, these and the subsequent sketches for Op. 23 constitute an interruption in his work on his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/_7zTHDH9ROmZdNRhCkwqyQl.20130308T135219Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Concerto for Flute, Oboe, Clarinet, Horn, Trumpet, Trombone, Violin, Viola and Piano</hi>, Op. 24</ref>, the first sketches of which already date from early 1931 but which had not progressed beyond 30 measures of the first movement by autumn 1932.<ptr target="#note-125" /> In fact, since mid-1931, Webern’s health problems and a change of residence, compounded by his numerous conducting responsibilities in 1932, had barely left him either the time or the opportunity to compose. On 3 March 1933, he was able to report to Jone that he had made the first sketches for “Herr Jesus mein” M 312. He furthermore complained about his lack of time, also in connection with this new composition:</p>
        <p>I am in a considerable state of distress: it is depressing me more than ever that I don’t have the time to compose. I quite spontaneously began setting your beautiful, wonderful poem one day, but I soon had to interrupt my work on it again, and the fact that I allowed myself to sit now and then at our work back in January and February is taking its toll. Now I’m so behind with the other things, with preparing for my concerts, here and in London. How am I supposed to do it? It’s wonderful that your poem is called “Joy”.<ptr target="#note-126" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern had clearly already told Jone about “our work” even before writing this letter, and the title “Die Freude” (“Joy”) that Webern mentions here refers to a subsequent communication from Jone that the verses set to music by Webern (in a manuscript version independent of their publication in <hi rend="italic">Brenner</hi>) belonged to a poem of that title.<ptr target="#note-127" /> However, Webern seems to have been consistent in using published versions of the poems as the basis for his compositions.<ptr target="#note-128" /> It was not until two months later, when Webern was busy both with a <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/u3kyPWlfROW3WRRzqzm=qAs.20230526T14432376984268Z">concert in the Great Hall of the Konzerthaus in Vienna on 19 March</ref>
          <ptr target="#note-129" /> and with his weekly lecture series “Paths to new music”,<ptr target="#note-130" /> that he began work on the piano introduction (<hi rend="bold">M 312 Sk3</hi>) and wrote the opening of his continuity draft up to measure 8 (<hi rend="bold">M 312 Sk4</hi>). He then revisited the opening of this continuity draft from measure 4 onwards, dating this version “31. V. 33” (<hi rend="bold">M 312 Sk4</hi>, mm. 4B–5C), which means that it was not begun until after his return from his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/_0jPquQOS7SsNTWAh5Zvtg4.20230526T221530958610456Z">concert tour in London (16–26 April)</ref> and a <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/o=IEBHKuRmCutkJSuDn6hQy.20230526T144512300341Z">radio concert with Mahler’s Sixth Symphony that he conducted on 23 May</ref>.<ptr target="#note-131" /> At the close of this continuity draft, Webern wrote: “Maria Enzersdorf | 14. VII. 33”.</p>
        <p>After a <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/fw=EbfX=Rhex3MoPUqpRwAe.20230526T144545497871192Z">radio concert on 21 July</ref>,<ptr target="#note-132" /> Webern began sketching another song, this time a setting of a text in <hi rend="italic">Brenner </hi>that was printed on the same page, directly above the verses that he had already set (“Es stürzt aus Höhen” M 313). He wrote to Jone on 29 July that he had completed the song he had begun previously, and that he had begun work on a new one:</p>
        <p>I have already been working well. Your texts fulfil me more and more; one of them is already finished, from “Herz Jesus mein” to “Und, ewig Schlafende, auch euch erwartet Tag”. And now I am linking “Es stürzt aus Höhen Frische” – how wonderful is the substance of these words – to “überglüht noch lange Glut” to form a second song. But the order of the two songs will correspond to that of your poems.</p>
        <p>How deeply they touch me. And I am so glad that I am finally in this position (composing a work to your texts). I had desired this for a long time. After I had finished the first song, I had to interrupt my work for 8 days because I still had to conduct a concert on the radio. I wanted to turn it down. But ultimately – well, you know the reasons why.<ptr target="#note-133" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern presumably interrupted his work on the continuity draft of this second song when he went on holiday “to an alpine pasture at an altitude of some 1600 m near Kitzbühel in the Tyrol”<ptr target="#note-134" /> in early August. According to the date given in <hi rend="bold">A</hi>, he completed it on “18. VIII. 33” (<hi rend="bold">M 313 Sk4</hi> m. 30C). In a letter to Jone of 3 September, he declared the two songs he had written up to now to be complete “for the moment”:</p>
        <p>For the moment, I have finished composing the texts from your “Viae inviae”. It has proceeded as I had planned: 1<hi rend="super">st</hi> song: “Es stürzt aus Höhen” up to “den Himmel u. die Seele überglüht noch lange Glut.” 2. “Herr Jesus mein” up to “auch euch erwartet Tag.” (i. e. the whole of page 65 from “Brenner”). I say “for the moment”, because I feel that I might soon have to come back to words of yours. But for the time being, at least, I believe that these 2 songs should remain on their own. They form a whole in musical terms, in the sense that they demonstrate a certain contrast. At the moment, I’m busy again with a purely instrumental piece that I began quite some while ago. How happy I was when I was working with your words!<ptr target="#note-135" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern also resumed sketching the first movement of his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/_7zTHDH9ROmZdNRhCkwqyQl.20130308T135219Z">Concerto, Op. 24</ref> in early September, using the same sketchbook. However, he was able neither to finish it nor to work continually on it. At the end of that same month, he was planning to play Jone both of the songs from Op. 23 that he had completed up to now, during one of her stays in Vienna:</p>
        <p>You will soon be coming to Vienna, thank God. [...] I wonder what you’ll say to my songs that use your texts? How will it seem to you, when you hear your words as music? If only I could keep working. I hope to be able to start again in October.<ptr target="#note-136" />
        </p>
        <p>It was only in early January 1934 that Webern returned to work on Op. 23, making his initial sketches in <hi rend="bold">A</hi> for the song “Das dunkle Herz” M 314 (<hi rend="bold">M 314 Sk1</hi>, <hi rend="bold">M 314 Sk2</hi> and <hi rend="bold">M 314 Sk3</hi>; these are dated “3. I. 1934” and “5. I. 34”). Its text uses the opening verses that were numbered together as a unit in <hi rend="italic">Brenner</hi>, and in this respect it serves as a completion of the two songs that Webern had already composed. In a letter to Jone, Webern emphasised that the order of the verses as printed in the source would continue to determine their order in his cycle, which had now grown to encompass three songs:</p>
        <p>I’m now finally back at work. It’s: “Das dunkle Herz, das in sich lauscht...”. It’s everything that’s on the page from then on, in other words up to where I was already: “Es stürzt aus Höhen Frische…”. Following the order that you determined, [this new song] shall precede this and the subsequent “Herr Jesus mein…”.</p>
        <p>It seems to me as if my current state of working is something I have never before experienced like this.</p>
        <p>I hope it can last!<ptr target="#note-137" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern’s work on the continuity draft (<hi rend="bold">M 314 Sk3</hi>), which he had begun on 5 January 1934, was then interrupted by his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/MANTWbVOQC6ke76hmfjHZAg.20230526T145121164696402Z">radio concert with Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy’s Violin Concerto and Third Symphony on 28 January</ref>.<ptr target="#note-138" /> Another interruption was occasioned by the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Oo6e0Pi6Tgagw=6CbOKJ8wo.20170626T080857Z">street fighting that took place from 12 to 15 February in Vienna and other big cities in Austria between the Republikanischer Schutzbund (the paramilitary organization of the Social Democratic Party in Austria) on the one side, and the army and police under the control of Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuß’s regime on the other</ref>. These events had far-reaching consequences for Webern’s career as a conductor (see the details below on the <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 25) and also had a short-term impact on his state of mind, making it difficult for him to continue work on the song he had begun, as he explained in a letter to Jone of 14 February:</p>
        <p>Dearest Mrs Jone,</p>
        <p>The commotion of the last few days has been monstrous and is becoming ever more so. It is barely possible to keep hold of a single thought [...].</p>
        <p>[...] And last week, I once again used every free moment to continue working on the poems [<hi rend="italic">sic</hi>] “Das dunkle Herz”. I again had a little free time. [...]</p>
        <p>And now once again – Mrs Jone! [I hear] the thunder of big guns and the rattle of machine-guns. –<ptr target="#note-139" />
        </p>
        <p>On 20 February, Webern wrote to Humplik, telling him that he had nevertheless reached the passage “an das Wartende im Dunkel” in his continuity draft, thus measure 15.<ptr target="#note-140" /> By the beginning of March he had got as far as measure 24: “In my work, I have reached: ... ‘ein goldenes Flattern trägt’ and I’m going to continue tomorrow. I still have some free time ahead of me.”<ptr target="#note-141" /> He reported completing the sketch for the vocal part on 11 March,<ptr target="#note-142" /> and he dated the continuity draft “15. III. 34” upon finally completing it. In the letter that he then wrote to Jone, Webern gave a relatively detailed description of this new song, and went on to propose a title for the collection of songs he had now finished:</p>
        <p>Meanwhile, the third song is finished.</p>
        <p>Because it encompasses the text from “Das dunkle Herz…” to “…ich und du und alle”, it has become rather long and in its musical form it is really a kind of “aria”, comprising a slow section and then a quicker section from “ich bin nicht mein…”, though it nevertheless bears the tempo marking “Very calmly”.</p>
        <p>This 2<hi rend="super">nd</hi> section is kept in an almost whispering tone. Perhaps you can get a rough idea from this description how I have interpreted your words in the 2<hi rend="super">nd</hi> section in particular: after a great upsurge in the first [section] there is utterly abrupt, complete silence, calm, simplicity.</p>
        <p>I thought that the title could be this:</p>
        <p>Three Songs from Viae inviae.</p>
        <p>May I adopt this title from your poems?</p>
        <p>I shall send you the manuscript soon.<ptr target="#note-143" />
        </p>
        <p>In a letter that Webern sent one week later to Alban Berg, he went into greater detail about the work’s formal organization, also regarding the other songs:</p>
        <p>I have just finished a third song (based on Jone texts). Actually, it’s an aria, comprising a slow section and a quicker section. It will be the first.</p>
        <p>And I’ve realized that the other two, which I composed earlier, are actually something other than songs (in their form): the one is a straightforward recitative with an arioso, the other (which is now the last of the sequence) is a rondo.</p>
        <p>Thus, without having actually wanted it, I’ve come to engage with larger vocal forms in this opus. I’ll end up writing an opera after all.<ptr target="#note-144" />
        </p>
        <p>It is unclear whether Webern here means “finished” to refer retrospectively to the continuity draft whose completion predates this letter by a few days, or whether he is referring to some fair copy that he might already have made. (It is also possible that he had made fair copies of the other two songs shortly after having finished their respective continuity drafts). In any case, the autograph engraver’s copy of all three songs, <hi rend="bold">C</hi>, was received by Universal Edition before July, and was accepted for publication on 11 July.<ptr target="#note-145" /> However, the actual publishing process was delayed considerably. Webern had initially assumed that “U. E. [...] will [print] my last work by the autumn”,<ptr target="#note-146" /> but by the end of August he learned that his publisher had “regrettably not yet begun” with engraving his songs “due to other, time-critical work”.<ptr target="#note-147" /> It was not until February 1935 that Webern’s manuscript was finally sent to the engraver – though this order to the engraver was immediately rescinded. The engraver in fact only began work in early January 1936. Webern received the first proofs at the end of that same month, with two further sets of proofs received on 10 and 27 March respectively. The <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 23 were published on 4 May 1936 in an edition of 302 copies.<ptr target="#note-148" />
        </p>
        <p>Already in 1935, Webern had hoped that <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/uyYCI5XISOCTnLbb1aMNQQM.20200520T095844Z">Julia Nessy</ref> might sing his <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 23, but this was not to be.<ptr target="#note-149" /> The <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/YqAC8rgdQf6Egg=G6XpAaAt.20230526T154815742910429Z">world premiere did not take place until 5 December 1943 at the Basel Conservatory</ref>, without the composer being present. This was a concert of the local section of the ISCM, largely organized by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/qvAqRcetQFGOyAswKpOiRAE.20230706T160143902402258Z">Willi Reich</ref>, in celebration of Webern’s 60<hi rend="super">th</hi> birthday.<ptr target="#note-150" /> The pianist <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/IHAK7=ESSKmigjTWgDhmhwa.20171124T083908Z">Paul Baumgartner</ref> accompanied <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/tsWHLWd7QvaNdKoR=MZeDAe.20231128T131952684964307Z">Marguerite Gradmann-Lüscher</ref>, who had already given a performance of Webern’s <hi rend="italic">Five Songs on Poems of Stefan George</hi>, Op. 4, and a selection from the <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12, during <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/8up1blczS5usXWWXmI7kzgN.20230526T164646026558721Z">Webern’s visit to Switzerland in 1940</ref>.<ptr target="#note-151" />
        </p>
        <p>The reviews of this concert in the Basel newspapers were clearly influenced by the introductory talk given by Reich and focused on offering an overall view of this supposedly “other-worldly” composer, who was thus already being seen as a kind of historical figure:</p>
        <p>To be sure, the works that were performed (some of which were world premieres) conveyed the impression of being something thoroughly unique, unusual and unworldly. This is a music of the highest spiritual potency, embodying law and power at the same time. One might almost say it is too true to be beautiful, meaning that this music serves only the imperatives of honesty and sincerity, far beyond all notions of aural beauty or discord, and thereby compels its notes unconditionally to submit to the law of the spirit and its power of cognition. [...] But the general development of music cannot reach this point, and nor should it, because only someone who has set himself apart from the world and does not care about its judgements will be able to see these things and to reproduce them in sound: namely Anton Webern.<ptr target="#note-152" />
        </p>
        <p>Another review wrote only as follows about the <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>:</p>
        <p>Three songs Op. 23 from Hildegard Jone’s <hi rend="italic">Viae inviae</hi> were given their first performance. Here, the calm, tender vocal line, which is only occasionally fractured by large leaps, is disturbed by fierce, hard interjections from the accompaniment.<ptr target="#note-153" />
        </p>
        <p>For an <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/foQ6QA9oQKC8jWdP8_vlQQF.20230526T191345171087457Z">“evening of contemporary poetry” featuring Jone’s poems, planned for the Archbishop’s palace in Vienna on 29 November 1944</ref>, Jone and Webern for a while wanted to arrange a performance of both the <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 23, and the <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 25,<ptr target="#note-154" /> which were rehearsed by an unnamed “Swedish [woman] singer” and Webern’s student <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/l4hFb86gRnWCSYreBRlvTQ2.20230526T204928787306385Z">Fré Focke</ref>.<ptr target="#note-155" /> Ultimately, however, this performance did not take place, and no further plans for performances during Webern’s lifetime are known to us.</p>
      </div>
      <div xml:id="op25">
        <head>Three Songs on Poems of Hildegard Jone, Op. 25</head>
        <p>The <hi rend="italic">Three Songs after Poems of </hi>
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/57rWS6x6SuGhLsZ3lFlP2AX.20230706T153331654899123Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Hildegard Jone</hi>
          </ref>, Op. 25, which Webern composed in the course of 1934, mark a continuation of his compositional interest in her poetry that had begun the year before with his <hi rend="italic">Three Songs from </hi>Viae inviae, Op. 23. However, Webern’s professional situation changed drastically on account of the political consequences of the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Oo6e0Pi6Tgagw=6CbOKJ8wo.20170626T080857Z">battles that took place from 12 to 15 February 1934 in Vienna and other big Austrian cities between the paramilitary Republikanischer Schutzbund of the Social Democratic Party and the army and police authorities of the Dollfuß regime</ref>. The latter now banned the Social Democratic Party, which meant that Webern lost his job as conductor with the Vienna Workers’ Symphony Concerts and as the artistic director of the Social Democratic Choral Society (the “Singverein der Sozialdemokratischen Kunststelle”). This in turn meant that the number of his radio engagements dwindled. In a letter to <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Y1=4oD0OTZqzzOQM=H9ywA_.20230526T214948203842794Z">Arnold Schoenberg</ref>, who had emigrated to the United States in 1933, Webern described his situation in comparatively drastic terms:</p>
        <p>It’s becoming increasingly difficult for me here. I am very aware of what’s been taken from me by the events in question, and which will hardly be able to be restored. – And apart from material things, it’s as if their cannon had shot to pieces – no, their cannon really have shot to pieces – what I had built up so painstakingly over 10 years.<ptr target="#note-156" />
        </p>
        <p>All the same, his increasing isolation did have one specific consequence: “I’ve at least now got some time for my work […]”<ptr target="#note-157" />
        </p>
        <p>After completing his <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 23 in March 1934, Webern continued working on his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/_7zTHDH9ROmZdNRhCkwqyQl.20130308T135219Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Concerto for Flute, Oboe, Clarinet, Horn, Trumpet, Trombone, Violin, Viola and Piano</hi>, Op. 24</ref>, and in parallel with this he also began composing a song to a text from Jone’s collection entitled <hi rend="italic">Die Freude</hi> (“Joy”), which comprises 29 (unnumbered) poems in total, in July of the same year. Jone had published her cycle in the autumn of 1933 in the Catholic bimonthly magazine <hi rend="italic">Die Schildgenossen</hi>. It is subdivided into the following:</p>
        <p>–  5 “Spring” (“Frühling”) poems (from which Webern set “Wie bin ich froh!” M 317 [Op. 25/1]),</p>
        <p>–  8 “Star” (“Stern”) poems (from which Webern set “Sterne, ihr silbernen Biene” M 321 [Op. 25/3]) and</p>
        <p>–  16 “Death” (“Tod”) poems (from which Webern set “Des Herzens Purpurvogel” M 322 [Op. 25/2]).<ptr target="#note-158" />
        </p>
        <p>It is impossible to determine whether Webern might have received a manuscript from Jone of the three poems he chose to set, either before or after she published them. In any case, we do know that the relevant issue of <hi rend="italic">Die Schildgenossen</hi> was still unknown to Webern at the close of November 1933.<ptr target="#note-159" />
        </p>
        <p>In early January 1934, when Webern had only just begun his continuity draft of M 314 (Op. 23/1), he announced that his next project might involve setting “several ‘Star’ poems”, i. e. poems from the eight “Star” poems in the collection <hi rend="italic">Die Freude</hi>.<ptr target="#note-160" /> In fact, after having completed the continuity draft for M 314 (on 15 March 1934) and the first movement of his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/_7zTHDH9ROmZdNRhCkwqyQl.20130308T135219Z">Concerto, Op. 24</ref> (on 25 June 1934), Webern did not set any of the “Star” poems, but instead chose the first of the “Spring” group, which is also the very first poem in the whole collection: “Wie bin ich froh!” M 317. (Webern’s sketches for the first movement of his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/_7zTHDH9ROmZdNRhCkwqyQl.20130308T135219Z">Concerto, Op. 24</ref> reveal that he had also considered interrupting his work to set the poem <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/4XO9u5osSU2UznbaDUuWTgu.20230526T184950302044133Z">“Wie kann der Tod so nah der Liebe wohnen?” [M 315]</ref> for chorus [on 11 May 1934], though he rejected this idea). According to the dates in his sketches, Webern began composing “Wie bin ich froh!” on 4 July 1934. A few days later, he wrote to Jone and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/HCLb8JygShOaXx_p9FTU0gE.20130201T141418Z">Josef Humplik</ref> to tell them about it:</p>
        <p>Did I tell you already that my first movement [i. e. of Op. 24] is finished? Right now, for reasons that I’ll tell you later, I have interrupted it to write something else: a setting of a brief poem by you, dearest friend [“Freundin”, i. e. Jone]:</p>
        <p>“Wie bin ich froh! Noch einmal</p>
        <p>wird mir Alles grün….” [“How happy I am! Once again, everything is turning green for me…”]<ptr target="#note-161" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern’s “reasons” for writing a song, instead of continuing with the next movements of his Concerto, Op. 24, were probably linked to his wanting to complete a work in time for <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/cOTLfHzGR=GARUNrn=lS7gX.20230526T211149314979176Z">David Josef Bach’s</ref> 60<hi rend="super">th</hi> birthday on 13 August of that year. Bach was a childhood friend of Schoenberg’s who had initiated the Workers’ Symphony Concerts in Vienna in the 1910s. He had also been the director of the Social Democratic Party’s arts office since 1919, and from 1922 onwards had engaged Webern repeatedly to conduct its concerts. Most importantly, he had appointed Webern as the chief conductor of the Singverein in late 1923 and had thereby made a significant contribution to establishing his reputation as a conductor. When the Social Democratic Party was banned after the events of February 1934, this put Bach himself in a precarious situation – a fact to which Webern drew attention in his letters to Schoenberg and others. He also mentioned Bach’s upcoming birthday and the song that he intended to dedicate to him:</p>
        <p>For Dr Bach’s 60<hi rend="super">th</hi> birthday – on 13 August of this year – the following is being prepared: an address with signatures and a collection of money. His financial situation is still highly onerous […].</p>
        <p>I’m going to dedicate a song to him […].<ptr target="#note-162" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern had finished his continuity draft of 15 measures, <hi rend="bold">M 317 Sk4</hi>, in <hi rend="bold">A</hi> (Sketchbook 3) a few days before, on 16 July, and thereupon wrote to Jone: “The new song is ready. –”<ptr target="#note-163" /> There was for the moment no mention of his including it in any collection of songs he might be planning.<ptr target="#note-164" /> After this continuity draft, the same sketchbook contains sketches for the second movement (M 319) of his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/_7zTHDH9ROmZdNRhCkwqyQl.20130308T135219Z">Concerto, Op. 24</ref>, dated “21 VII[.]” Webern wrote the fair copy of his new song in <hi rend="bold">E</hi> either just before making these sketches, or in parallel with them, though its initial layer presumably did not correspond to the later version that lasts 12 measures. Webern made a presentation copy of version 1 of this song (<hi rend="bold">B</hi>) as his birthday gift for Bach. This was probably copied just before Webern left for a mountain hike in the Ötztal Alps on 11 August. Bach was spending the summer in Henndorf just outside Salzburg, and Webern stopped off there on his journey to the mountains in order to deliver his gift in person.<ptr target="#note-165" /> Webern initially revised the autograph of M 317 contained in <hi rend="bold">E</hi> (as Op. 25/1) to bring it in line with version 1 as found in <hi rend="bold">B</hi>, though he later changed it again – presumably only when he made the fair copies of M 321 (Op. 25/3) and M 322 (Op. 25/2) – which resulted in version 2 of the song that he incorporated into Op. 25 that ultimately comprised three songs.</p>
        <p>A few days after having completed the continuity draft for the third movement (M 320) of his Concerto, Op. 24 on 4 September, Webern reported to Humplik and Jone about his plan for a “song opus” that would also contain “Wie bin ich froh!”, M 317: “I have just finished my instrumental opus and I now want to continue with the song opus that I have already begun – [for which] ‘Wie bin ich froh’ has long been finished.”<ptr target="#note-166" /> An initial sketch for “Sterne, ihr silbernen Bienen” M 321 in <hi rend="bold">D</hi> (Sketchbook 4) can be found among the sketches for the third movement of his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/_7zTHDH9ROmZdNRhCkwqyQl.20130308T135219Z">Concerto, Op. 24</ref>, and was probably already made in late August 1934 (<hi rend="bold">M 321 Sk1</hi>). According to the dates in Webern’s own hand, he began making further sketches on 19 September (<hi rend="bold">M 321 Sk2</hi>). In early October, he was able to report to Jone on his progress, though the precise number of songs for his “new song book” remained open. He even hinted at the possible inclusion of new songs that were not in her poetry collection <hi rend="italic">Die Freude</hi>:</p>
        <p>Dear, dear friend,</p>
        <p>Many heartfelt thanks for the beautiful songs!</p>
        <p>“How happy I am” to have them [i. e. an allusion to the title of M 317, “Wie bin ich froh”]. I am sure that one or the other of them will be included in the new songbook. Now I am working on “Sterne, Ihr silbernen Bienen...” and have already made much progress.<ptr target="#note-167" />
        </p>
        <p>Webern completed his continuity draft on 8 October and dated it thus (<hi rend="bold">M 321 Sk3</hi> mm. 21B–26B). He wrote to Jone on 17 October to report on its completion, and also on his having begun work on “Des Herzens Purpurvogel” M 322.<ptr target="#note-168" /> He dated the beginning of an initial continuity draft “24. X[.] 34”, though he later broke off work on it (<hi rend="bold">M 322 Sk3</hi> mm. {1A}, {1B}, {1C-2A}, 1D–2B). He had presumably begun the preceding sketches (<hi rend="bold">M 322 Sk1</hi> and <hi rend="bold">M 322 Sk2</hi>) before writing to Jone on 17 October; he might also have begun <hi rend="bold">M 322 Sk3</hi> measures {1A}, {1B}, {1C–2A} before that date. Webern seems to have been working on the final continuity draft in early November,<ptr target="#note-169" /> which was completed on 15 November according to the date in the sketchbook (<hi rend="bold">M 322 Sk4</hi> m. 21C).</p>
        <p>We have no documentary proof of when Webern made the fair copies of his two new songs, nor when he decided to reverse the order of the second and third songs when concluding this new opus (which was contrary both to their order in <hi rend="italic">Die Freude</hi> and to the order in which he had composed them). Webern no longer mentions this project in his letters from December 1934 onwards. Instead, he seems to have been especially preoccupied with his arrangement of the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/DUQEhkOsQPi=5WotQCSjSgf.20240706T164155992912642Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Fuga (Ricercata) a 6 voci</hi> from Bach’s <hi rend="italic">Musical Offering</hi> (M 323)</ref>. He probably completed his fair copy of the complete collection of songs that he now numbered Op. 25 (<hi rend="bold">E</hi>) by the end of 1934 at the latest.</p>
        <p>In mid-October 1938, Webern wrote to <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Ea7YdjsPSj=5BwE2qXZnJQr.20230526T211237635733948Z">Erwin Stein</ref>, a former student of Schoenberg’s who had worked for <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/xiy9FauqRQqVl_dsLWMYVQz.20250204T110725416877022Z">Universal Edition</ref>, had recently emigrated to London, and had now taken up a job as an editor for Boosey &amp; Hawkes. He mentioned his “Three Songs with Piano, Op. 25, on poems of H. Jone” as being “a book of songs not yet printed nor yet accepted by any publisher”.<ptr target="#note-170" /> We do not know if Webern had already offered them to Universal Edition. It was not until Webern’s 60<hi rend="super">th</hi> birthday in 1943 – presumably in connection with a possible performance (see below) – that Universal held out to Webern the prospect of publishing these songs, though nothing came of it during Webern’s lifetime.<ptr target="#note-171" /> This opus was only published by Universal Edition in 1956, long after Webern’s death.</p>
        <p>The world premiere of these <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 25, together with that of the <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 23, was planned for a <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/YqAC8rgdQf6Egg=G6XpAaAt.20230526T154815742910429Z">concert of the Basel section of the ISCM, held on 5 December 1943</ref>, with <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/tsWHLWd7QvaNdKoR=MZeDAe.20231128T131952684964307Z">Marguerite Gradmann-Lüscher</ref> accompanied by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/IHAK7=ESSKmigjTWgDhmhwa.20171124T083908Z">Paul Baumgartner</ref>. In order to facilitate this performance, Universal Edition apparently made two photographic copies of Webern’s autograph (since lost) and presumably sent them to <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/qMCFngv3R_qn1VLSZKbPawh.20130201T141420Z">Erich Schmid</ref>.<ptr target="#note-172" /> But the <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 25 were not performed on that occasion. When readings of Jone’s poetry were being organized at an <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/foQ6QA9oQKC8jWdP8_vlQQF.20230526T191345171087457Z">“Evening of contemporary poetry” to be held at the Archbishop’s Palace in Vienna on 29 November 1944</ref>, Jone and Webern for some time harboured the plan of including a performance of both the <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 23 and the <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 25.<ptr target="#note-173" /> They were to have been performed by an unnamed “Swedish singer” accompanied by Webern’s student <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/l4hFb86gRnWCSYreBRlvTQ2.20230526T204928787306385Z">Fré Focke</ref>, who also began rehearsing the works together.<ptr target="#note-174" /> Ultimately, however, this performance never took place. The world premiere was only given posthumously, on 16 March 1952 in New York, with <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Uln0CI_iRpWDkwzsSsDrEQ7.20240807T144638775983925Z">Bethany Beardslee</ref> accompanied by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/NINhMj44T0mms7N8_P=3Iwf.20240807T145204930617507Z">Jacques Monod</ref> at the piano.<ptr target="#note-175" />
        </p>
      </div>
      <div xml:id="about">
        <head>About this edition</head>
        <p>The songs with piano accompaniment that are collected in this volume are published in different formats depending on the situation in which their respective texts have been transmitted to us. The published song collections are here presented as “work editions” (<hi rend="italic">Werkeditionen</hi>). The versions that are extant solely as fair copies in ink, or which – as in the case of the songs to texts by Stefan George – are grouped together in clusters in this edition because the common circumstances of their composition imply that they belong together, are presented here as “text editions” (<hi rend="italic">Texteditionen</hi>). The <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 25 constitute an exception to this rule, for they were not published during Webern’s lifetime. The autograph fair copy of the complete Op. 25 nevertheless offers all the characteristics of an engraver’s copy of a work intended for publication. For this reason, presenting this opus as a work edition here is both the obvious choice and unproblematic from the view of producing a critical edition of the musical text. Extant pencil sketches will be presented as “sketch editions” (<hi rend="italic">Skizzeneditionen</hi>) in the online edition of the AWG.</p>
        <p>Webern’s songs to texts by Stefan George are edited here as a coherent cluster. The final form in which Webern left them to us – the two collections published as his Opp. 3 and 4 – was preceded by a common compositional history that featured several individually distinguishable versions of their musical text, plus four songs that were not included in the final publications. The different versions of the musical text that can be identified in the correction layers of the surviving ink manuscripts and that predate the final publications (which are here given as work editions) are presented here as text editions in view of the material used to notate them. These include some of the earliest versions of the musical texts, which at times come across as sketch-like. (In these cases, a sketch edition would provide less information on the writing process than is usually the case with Webern’s pencil sketches, because those layers that predate the correction process have often been subjected to erasure and can rarely be deciphered with any certainty; they are generally impossible to decipher at all).</p>
        <p>In the case of the various collections of George songs in particular that Webern conceived between 1909 and 1919, it is not always possible to reconstruct unambiguously which versions of which songs were intended in what order, so the different versions that are nevertheless decipherable in the sources are presented in chronological order in the printed edition here, while the songs themselves are presented in alphabetical order according to their respective title.</p>
        <p>As a rule, Webern’s numerous versions of his George songs adopted the poet’s spellings (especially his frequent lack of capitalization for nouns) and the occasionally sparse punctuation of his original poems. These idiosyncrasies have been retained in our text editions here. Any additions or corrections made here to the song texts are similarly oriented on George’s original poems, and are listed in the Critical Notes (<hi rend="italic">Textkritische Anmerkungen</hi>). Any cases of divergence from the original poem are denoted by “<hi rend="italic">sic</hi>” in the Critical Notes.</p>
        <p>In comparison to the George songs, there are comparatively few early versions of the individual songs that make up the <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12, and the <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 25, but they have been dealt with in similar fashion here with regard to the order of their respective text editions. Even though the idiosyncrasies of the respective source texts for these editions are not as characteristic as in the case of George’s poems, we have applied the same principles to our editorial treatment of the vocal text.</p>
      </div>
      <div xml:id="acknowledgements">
        <head>Acknowledgements</head>
        <p>As editor, I should like to thank the numerous people and institutions who have supported me in many ways during my work. My thanks above all go to the staff of the archives and libraries who have made digital reproductions of their sources available to us, or granted us access to the originals: The Arnold Schönberg Center in Vienna, the Music Division of the Library of Congress in Washington D.C., the Morgan Library &amp; Museum in New York City, the Music Collection of the Austrian National Library in Vienna, the Music Collection of the Wienbibliothek im Rathaus in Vienna, and the Historical Archive of Universal Edition, also in Vienna. Special thanks go to the Paul Sacher Foundation in Basel, which holds most of the extant Webern sources, in particular to Sabine Hänggi-Stampfli, Felix Meyer, Simon Obert and Andrietta Wahl for always being ready to help and for providing expert advice.</p>
        <p>I should also like to thank all the current members of the AWG project team for their collegiality and for their fruitful spirit of collaboration, namely Michael Matter, Stefan Münnich, Simon Obert, Barbara Schingnitz and Matthias Schmidt, plus our former colleagues Julia Bungardt, Monika Kröpfl, Nikolaus Urbanek and Manuel Strauß, and our interns Tamara Ackermann, Yuta Asai, Daia Aschwanden, Madita Knöpfle and Youchen Yu.</p>
        <p>Rita Gautschy (Swiss National Data and Service Center for the Humanities), Lukas Rosenthaler and Tobias Schweizer (Digital Humanities Lab of the University of Basel) offered advice and assistance in designing and setting up the online edition, as did numerous colleagues from the abovementioned institutions.</p>
        <p>Heinz Stolba of Universal Edition in Vienna deserves my thanks for his commitment and cooperation.</p>
        <p>Finally, I should like to express my sincere gratitude to Simone Hohmaier (Staatliches Institut für Musikforschung, Berlin), Juliane Brand (Karl Weigl Foundation, San Rafael CA), Regina Busch (Vienna), Felix Wörner (Basel) and Michelle Ziegler (Basel) for suggestions, feedback and advice of all kinds.</p>
        <p>Basel, 14 May 2024 Thomas Ahrend</p>
        <p>Translation: Chris Walton</p>
      </div>
    </body>
    <back>
      <div type="notes">
        <note xml:id="note-1">Anton Webern, “Drei frühe Tagebücher”, transcribed and with commentary by Barbara Schingnitz, in: <hi rend="italic">Der junge Webern. Texte und Kontexte</hi>, ed. Thomas Ahrend and Matthias Schmidt, Vienna: Lafite, 2015 (Webern-Studien 2b), pp. 215–324, here 265 (Tagebuch II, fol. 19<hi rend="super">r</hi>–19<hi rend="super">v</hi>). Webern did not, however, copy this poem from George’s collection <hi rend="italic">Das Jahr der Seele</hi> (Berlin: Blätter für die Kunst, 1897, pp. [21 f.]), but rather from Ernst von Wolzogen’s novel <hi rend="italic">Das dritte Geschlecht</hi> (Berlin: Eckstein, [1899], p. 103), where it is quoted in a subtly altered version. See the commentary on Webern, “Drei frühe Tagebücher”, p. 305, and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/kCgJ4ylqSSeUMZ1z8IOq6Ag.20240706T164027113846582Z">Cornelia Bartsch, “‘Bis endlich das Weib vor Weh vergeht…’ Geschlechtererzählungen des jungen Anton Webern”, in: <hi rend="italic">Der junge Webern. Texte und Kontexte</hi>, pp. 169–197</ref>, especially pp. 196 f.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-2">For example, on 11 February and 3 December 1904. See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/rEUiS0dcTFSja0ngV2SNlAK.20240807T150115581100129Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Conrad Ansorge 1862–1930. Ein Pianist des Fin de siècle in Berlin und Wien</hi>, ed. Eike Rathgeber, Christian Heitler and Manuela Schwartz, Vienna: Böhlau, 2017</ref>, pp. 421 f. and 425. See this book also for further information on Webern’s activities in the Viennese Ansorge Society.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-3">Stefan George, <hi rend="italic">Das Jahr der Seele</hi>, Berlin: Bondi, <hi rend="super">3</hi>1904, pp. 14 (<hi rend="italic">Ja heil und dank dir…</hi>), 30 (<hi rend="italic">Noch zwingt mich treue…</hi>) and 118 (<hi rend="italic">Ihr tratet zu dem herde</hi>): <hi rend="bold">George_DJdS</hi>; Stefan George, <hi rend="italic">Die Bücher der Hirten- und Preisgedichte der Sagen und Sänge und der hängenden Gärten</hi>, Berlin: Bondi, <hi rend="super">3</hi>1907, p. 74 (<hi rend="italic">So ich traurig bin</hi>): <hi rend="bold">George_DBdH</hi>; Stefan George, <hi rend="italic">Der siebente Ring</hi>, Berlin: Blätter für die Kunst, 1907, pp. 126 (<hi rend="italic">Eingang</hi>) and 157–161 (<hi rend="italic">Dies ist ein lied</hi>, <hi rend="italic">Im windes-weben</hi>, <hi rend="italic">An baches ranft</hi>, <hi rend="italic">Im morgen-taun</hi>, <hi rend="italic">Kahl reckt der baum</hi>): <hi rend="bold">George_DsR</hi>. Webern’s copies are held by CH-Bps, Anton Webern Collection (PSS AW B 1039–1041).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-4">Albrecht Dümling has discerned biographical connections with the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/mBM9M6W7Rvq6w_dY03oeFAn.20230526T132808629760728Z">death of Webern’s mother in 1906</ref> and the mourning motif that runs through most of the George poems that he set to music. See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/58cESe0uS66pOLu1KUSDQw9.20240706T164031574473504Z">“‘Dies ist ein Lied für dich allein’. Zu einigen Motiven von Weberns Textwahl”, in: <hi rend="italic">Anton Webern I</hi>, ed. Heinz Klaus Metzger and Rainer Riehn, Munich: edition text + kritik, 1983 (Musik-Konzepte Sonderband), pp. 251–261</ref>.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-5">See Arnold Schoenberg, <hi rend="italic">Lieder mit Klavierbegleitung</hi>, critical report, ed. Christian Martin Schmidt, Mainz 1989 (Complete Works Section I Series B 1/2 Part 1), pp. 171–176 and pp. 182–217.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-6">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/IFH7sENVShqCLBvlPrp_DgN.20111119T000746Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 11 June 1908</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 18181]): “Since you asked me <del>yesterday</del> how I liked your songs: I couldn’t quite say, i. e. express the impression that they made on me. It was very stupid the way I said it. But please believe me that your work and especially these new songs are my only, wonderful role models.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-7">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/YHJSAOEqT8KfVgJnITf2OwH.20160524T082325Z">Thomas Ahrend, “Zu Anton Weberns George-Vertonung ‘Erwachen aus dem tiefsten Traumesschoße’. Eine Spurensuche”, in: <hi rend="italic">Jahrbuch des Staatlichen Instituts für Musikforschung Preußischer Kulturbesitz 2011</hi>, ed. Simone Hohmaier, Mainz: Schott, 2011, pp. 53–74</ref>, here pp. 66 ff.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-8">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/bC4vig1UTxutKu10A7WYFgl.20240706T164128886673379Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 13 December 1908</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 21729]).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-9">All the same, Webern later compiled song collections using these Dehmel songs, though he did not publish them. See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/G7K2mBtLSgyVgVGcbQi11wT.20240808T105232489070514Z">Mathew R. Shaftel, “Anton Webern’s Complete Early Songs (1899–1909)”, in: <hi rend="italic">The Anton Webern Collection. Early Vocal Music</hi>, ed. Shaftel, New York: Carl Fischer, 2004, pp. iii–xiii</ref>, here p. xiii.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-10">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/7TEyGiO7R7OKpCy9chrS5QF.20240808T124510996446136Z">Webern to Jalowetz, 25 May 1909</ref> (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/7rrJdASpRdqwIa3W2pNqwAC.20230526T221421959808014Z">Anton Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefe an Heinrich Jalowetz</hi>, ed. Ernst Lichtenhahn, Mainz: Schott, 1999 [Veröffentlichungen der Paul Sacher Stiftung 7]</ref>, p. 129).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-11">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/SPN8m72PRZqlHasdjOaBnQ1.20111119T000729Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 16 June 1909</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 21801]): “I have already written a whole string quartet. It has 5 movements. [...] This Saturday I’m going to Klagenfurt with my father, which we’ll use as our base for a few small excursions along the Wörtersee [<hi rend="italic">sic</hi>] and into the Karawank Mountains. I’ll be back here by the middle of next week. Then I first want to write a few songs[.] Then [something] for orchestra. I can hardly wait.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-12">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/aqilu5mQTo2=eUdgG6uRWwS.20240706T164125770336487Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 10 July 1909</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 21731]).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-13">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/BDKIKjl=RVWl2nX5Z6ki9AA.20111119T000729Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 20 August 1909</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 21809]).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-14">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/pDX0CnYWTlSHstX84iyeewK.20240808T105739742640607Z">Thomas Ahrend and Michelle Ziegler, “Anton Webern: <hi rend="italic">Dies ist ein Lied</hi> M 133. Impuls [Ahrend]: Flüchtige Reinschrift oder sorgfältige Skizze? Überlegungen zu Anton Weberns frühester Niederschrift von <hi rend="italic">Dies ist ein Lied</hi> M 133. Respondenz [Ziegler]: Bleistiftglück und Tintenbestimmtheit. Gedanken zu den Schreibstoffen im Kompositionsprozess von Anton Weberns <hi rend="italic">Dies ist ein Lied</hi>”, in: <hi rend="italic">Journal of the Arnold Schönberg Center</hi> 17 (2020), pp. 160–182</ref>.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-15">[Programme:] “Verein für Kunst und Kultur. Kammermusik- und Liederabend moderner Komponisten, Wien, 8. Februar 1910”, US-NH, Karl Weigl Papers (MSS 73). Digital copy at: <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/EILT3bp7Sc2m9_8wWrVvsgb.20161121T080801Z">https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/EILT3bp7Sc2m9_8wWrVvsgb.20161121T080801Z</ref>. The <hi rend="italic">Fünf Gesänge für eine tiefe Stimme</hi> by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/CBLZQF3YSba1TlmPyoRHfAt.20230526T191818657107289Z">Franz Schreker</ref> that are also mentioned on this programme, to be performed by <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/GWcRq9uzRSmDIfijHqWEEgw.20160728T101616Z">Theo Drill-Orridge</ref> and Clemens Kraus [<hi rend="italic">sic</hi>, i. e. <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/_dnVtO7RQwCF9Vx6=puP5gf.20160728T105024Z">Clemens Krauss</ref>?] were left out because of an injunction against the singer; see r. h., “Feuilleton. Von neuen Tonwerken”, in: <hi rend="italic">Wiener Zeitung</hi>, 17 February 1910 (<hi rend="italic">Wiener Abendpost</hi>), pp. 1–2, here p. 2.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-16">See also Julius Korngold, “Feuilleton. Musik. (Philharmonisches Konzert. – Konzertverein. – Arnold[-]Schönberg-Abend.)”, in: <hi rend="italic">Neue Freie Presse</hi>, 26 January 1910 (morning edition), pp. 1–3, here p. 3: “In [Schoenberg’s] George songs[...] a psalmodizing singing voice joins in the sounds and sequences of the new Schoenbergian grammar. Except that here, the words communicate and provide expression, albeit too insistently in the manner of pretentious, morbidly sensitive moods.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-17">Julius Korngold, “Feuilleton. Novitäten im Konzertsaale”, in: <hi rend="italic">Neue Freie Presse</hi>, 16 February 1910 (morning edition), pp. 1–3, here pp. 1–2. (“Oktave Mirbeau’s painter” is presumably the protagonist from Octave Mirbeau’s novel <hi rend="italic">Dans le ciel</hi> [<hi rend="italic">L’Écho de Paris</hi> 1892–1893].) For further reviews, see also Richard Specht, “Konzerte”, in:<hi rend="italic"> Der Merker</hi> 1 (1909/10), No. 10, p. 437, and r. h., “Feuilleton” (see note <ref target="#note-15">15</ref>).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-18">Both these leaves are held by CH-Bps, Anton Webern Collection. Facsimiles have been published in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/YHJSAOEqT8KfVgJnITf2OwH.20160524T082325Z">Ahrend, “Spurensuche”</ref> (see note <ref target="#note-7">7</ref>), pp. 62 f. The order of these songs, without regard to the original spelling of the titles or to the annotations in them (see below), was already established by Moldenhauer in his “Prefatory Note” to Anton Webern, <hi rend="italic">Four Stefan George Songs</hi>, ed. Peter Westergaard, New York: Carl Fischer, 1970, p. ii, and in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Hans and Rosaleen Moldenhauer, Anton von Webern. A Chronicle of His Life and Work, London: Victor Gollancz, 1978</ref>, p. 118 f. See also the introduction to <hi rend="italic">The Anton Webern Collection</hi>, ed. Mathew R. Shaftel, New York: Carl Fischer, 2004, p. xiii, who refers to the deletions made in the list for “Op. 4”, though he does not mention the annotations.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-19">The lists were written on different types of paper; red ink was used for “Op. 2”, black ink for “Op. 4”; “Op. 2” was written mostly in German cursive script, whereas “Op. 4” uses cursive and Latin letters alternately; and the titles of the poetic cycles in George are only given in the case of “Op. 4”.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-20">It is possible that the inclusion of <hi rend="italic">Eingang</hi> M 138, “Im Morgentaun” M 136 and “Kahl reckt der Baum” M 137 in “Op. 2” indicates that the first versions of these songs – regardless of their writing style and the type of paper used – were in fact written before <hi rend="italic">Trauer</hi>
          <hi rend="italic">I</hi> M 145, which is at the head of the list of songs for “Op. 4”; in other words, they were written before the end of May 1909. However, it is notable that both collections contain an equal number of songs (seven each), which would seem to be a counterargument against Webern having made a purely chronological selection for these two collections.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-21">In fact, the vertical stroke of this angle mark is the longest when compared with the others, i. e. it extends the farthest beyond the line in question. The form of this marking could well be understood as referring to both lines. For further possible interpretations, also of the other markings, see <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/YHJSAOEqT8KfVgJnITf2OwH.20160524T082325Z">Ahrend, “Spurensuche”</ref> (see note <ref target="#note-7">7</ref>), pp. 60–66.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-22">See Schoenberg to Hertzka, 7 October 1909 (cited as in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/O3BK7rlhSZKFEQRUOYDgrwq.20201104T095539Z">Julia Bungardt, “Einleitung”</ref>, in: <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Anton Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>, ed. Julia Bungardt, Vienna: Lafite, 2020 [Webern-Studien 5]</ref>, p. 12): “Dear Director, as arranged, I hereby inform you that I shall visit you on Sunday morning at about 11:30 a.m., together with my pupil Dr Anton von Webern, in order to play you my piano pieces and compositions by Webern. […].”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-23">See the explanations in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 722 f., who tends to a contrary opinion. Regarding “Erwachen aus dem tiefsten Traumesschoße” and <hi rend="italic">Kunfttag I</hi>, he writes: “originally planned for Op. 3”, and for <hi rend="italic">Trauer I</hi> and “Das lockere Saatgefilde”, “originally planned for Op. 4”.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-24">For a contrary opinion, however, see <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/YL7e9uxeRVWOr_4TIk44BA=.20160529T102037Z">Robert W. Wason, “A Pitch-Class Motive in Webern’s George Lieder, Op. 3”, in: <hi rend="italic">Webern Studies</hi>, ed. Kathryn Bailey, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996, pp. 111–134</ref>, here p. 133: “[A]fter all, it seems likely that Webern would have set George’s lieder in continuity; moreover, Webern may well have experimented with various orderings <hi rend="italic">later on</hi>, after having composed all fourteen songs, only to return to his initial conception for publication.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-25">The cycle <hi rend="italic">Lieder</hi> in George’s <hi rend="italic">Der siebente Ring</hi> is divided into a “Vorklang” (“prelude”) and several numbered sequences of poems plus individual poems. In his Op. 3, Webern arranged his first to fifth songs in the same order as in their source; they were all taken from the first sequence of George’s <hi rend="italic">Lieder</hi>, namely “Lieder I–VI”. He did not set the sixth song of the sequence, “Kreuz der strasse ...”. The designation “(Lieder I–IV)” after “An bachesranft....” in Webern’s list for his <hi rend="italic">Seven Songs</hi> “Op. 4” is probably a mistake, the intended designation being “I–VI”.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-26">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/QqVyDYC6SJmCTPKpIdwd2Ah.20240706T164140100740091Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 5 June 1911</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 21863]): “I’m quickly organizing a copy of my quartet myself and will send it, the violin piece[s] and some 10 songs.” See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 145.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-27">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/1orZqOyAQLW5l1Q_ZlLgmgr.20230526T215518350792801Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 30 September 1911</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 21900]): “The ‘Dreililien’ publishing house has sent my things back. They ‘unfortunately’ could not decide to [publish them]. I will now send them to D[r] Tischer.”. – See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/W0ybhvPMRSSWqxVgz=VajwD.20230526T213519433485478Z">Webern to Jalowetz, 23 October 1911</ref> (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/7rrJdASpRdqwIa3W2pNqwAC.20230526T221421959808014Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefe an Heinrich Jalowetz</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-10">10</ref>], pp. 168–171, here p. 169: “[…] I have sent Dr Tischer several things for his publishing house (prompted by Schoenberg).” <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 155, and the commentary to Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefe an Heinrich Jalowetz</hi> [note <ref target="#note-10">10</ref>], p. 172, write of “nine George songs”.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-28">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/fmJjs8u_S9uxRO899_zkVg8.20240808T125052097714352Z">Webern to Gerhard Tischer (Tischer &amp; Jagenberg), 2 January 1912</ref> (Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi> [note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>], p. 140): “I regret very much that you are not accepting my compositions for publication”, and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Lk3ECVMeRHyvIvp3QkCtuwm.20230706T140055552572799Z">Webern to Königer, 11 January 1912</ref> (A-Wn, HS 975/7–8): “Dr Tischer has sent my music back to me. So I’ve been rejected for the third time.” Webern is presumably counting the meeting that Schoenberg organized with Hertzka on 9 October 1909 (see above, note 22) as the first of these attempts to get a publisher.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-29">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/ZK2GUDOuS7O5dnARQ4K2igY.20240706T164112313469677Z">Webern to Königer, 23 November 1911</ref> (A-Wn, HS 975/7–6). The “sketch” mentioned in this passage from the letter remains unidentified. As far as we can determine, Webern did not copy out the song again, and it is unclear as to whether the sketch he mentions actually existed. See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/IyJzf=iASO6S3drAWFYjQwu.20190709T074310Z">Stefan Münnich, “Quellenverluste (Deperdita) als methodologischer Unsicherheitsbereich für Editorik und Datenmodellierung am Beispiel von Anton Webern’s George-Lied op. 4 Nr. 5”, in: <hi rend="italic">Die Modellierung des Zweifels – Schlüsselideen und -konzepte zur graphbasierten Modellierung von Unsicherheiten</hi>, ed. Andreas Kuczera, Thorsten Wübbena and Thomas Kollatz, Wolfenbüttel: Forschungsverbund Marbach Weimar Wolfenbüttel, 2019 (Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften / Sonderbände 4)</ref>, online resource, DOI: <ref target="http://dx.doi.org/10.17175/sb004_005">10.17175/sb004_005</ref>. In our Critical Report, we refrain from hypostatizing the possible existence of this further, inextant source.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-30">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Lk3ECVMeRHyvIvp3QkCtuwm.20230706T140055552572799Z">Webern to Königer, 11 January 1912</ref> (A-Wn, HS 975/7–8).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-31">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/qGWe0ybsQiaFlegOVrVwqwc.20111119T000724Z">Webern to Berg, 25 January 1912</ref> (cited as in <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Anton Webern – Alban Berg</hi>, ed. Simone Hohmaier and Rudolf Stephan [Briefwechsel der Wiener Schule 4], publication in preparation): “The day before yesterday I got the proofs of my song that will appear in the ‘blauer Reiter’. Did you also get [the proofs of] your song? Schoenberg is bringing his new song ‘Herzgewächse’.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-32">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/WvnnOhtoTea_fRXpDPFDNgM.20141120T120057Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 13 June 1912</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 21913]): “I have finally received the ‘blauer Reiter’.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-33">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/CJVzPv2MS1iuCzHDBd7oEQt.20111119T000724Z">Webern to Berg, 19 February 1912</ref> (cited as in <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Anton Webern – Alban Berg</hi> [note <ref target="#note-31">31</ref>]). Schoenberg’s Second String Quartet, Op. 10, had been published using the Straube lithographic press in February 1909. The “first” Quartet refers to Webern’s <hi rend="italic">Five Movements for String Quartet </hi>M 147–151, to distinguish these from his <hi rend="italic">Four Pieces for String Quartet</hi> M 171–174, composed in 1911, which in their later versions became four of his <hi rend="italic">Six Bagatelles for String Quartet</hi>, Op. 9. His “older 6 orchestral pieces” M 152–157 are similarly to be differentiated from his orchestral pieces <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/MPV0hnTeRd=jPqCJjoMDwAG.20230526T182050947309005Z">M 169</ref>–<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/g3jrDDkjT22MAo3Wxkld1Q_.20230526T182118538559139Z">170</ref>, also composed in 1911, which were later subsumed into his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/or1jwb36Twa7rzJh8XOkig3.20240706T164228596267231Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Five Pieces for Orchestra</hi>, Op. 10</ref>.See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/UPKCgjV9SGOTpcdgLkMqiQ6.20150210T094134Z">Webern to Königer, 20 February 1912</ref> (A-Wn, HS 975/7–10). The sequence of the compositions mentioned in these letters provides us with the following series of opus numbers: <hi rend="italic">Passacaglia</hi> (Op. 1), “9 Songs” (Op. 2), String Quartet (Op. 3) and Pieces for Orchestra (Op. 4).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-34">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/gqcC9bDTR=m3MfOEwpU_tgW.20200812T073731Z">Arnold Schoenberg, <hi rend="italic">Berliner Tagebuch</hi>, ed. Josef Rufer, Frankfurt am Main: Propyläen, 1974</ref>, p. 25 (15 February 1912). See also <hi rend="italic">ibid.</hi>, p. 20 (5 February 1912): “Looked at Webern’s ‘Passacaglia’. Truly excellent. Very good and highly original. Webern will surely become something extraordinary”, and <hi rend="italic">ibid</hi>., p. 27 (17 February 1912): “The Weberns visit us on the evening. They play a very beautiful song by Webern that Winternitz sang back then. I only see now how beautiful it is. A true song; and [I see how] Winternitz sang it equally without meaning and soul, just as she sang my George songs.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-35">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/8igmLDMtTmWUtlEf794uagQ.20240808T131052313814908Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 9 August 1912</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 21931]). Schoenberg had already written to Simrock, recommending Webern’s compositions to them (see <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/O3BK7rlhSZKFEQRUOYDgrwq.20201104T095539Z">Bungardt, “Einleitung”</ref> [note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>], pp. 14 f.).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-36">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RDk7Iu6sS4aqJ9srBzhhiQA.20141126T120731Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 10 September 1912</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 21939]): “[…] I got my compositions back from Simrock today. He writes that he can’t publish them.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-37">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/rfNjMwD0SdCLUHvVql9XgQx.20150108T155230Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 4 January 1913</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 21970]): “I will soon send my songs (a selection of them) to this publisher. Perhaps something will come of it after all”, and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/LEXbnJTNTM=9K=CBXvGjtwL.20150109T110631Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 20 January 1913</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 21975]): “Today I am finally sending my songs to Gadow in Hildburghausen. I am eager [to know] if something will come of it.” For information on the publishing house Gadow, which is barely known today, see Rudolf Schmidt, <hi rend="italic">Deutsche Buchhändler. Deutsche Buchdrucker</hi>, vol. 6, Eberswalde: n. n., 1908, p. 1072: “Besides publishing 7,600 copies of the ‘Tägliche Nachrichten’ and the ‘Hildburghäuser Kreisblatt’ [...], this company is primarily engaged in publishing schoolbooks, collections of songs for choir, and calendars. This printing company prints books, commercial materials and especially music.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-38">See Hertzka to Schoenberg, 24 June 1914 (cited as in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/O3BK7rlhSZKFEQRUOYDgrwq.20201104T095539Z">Bungardt, “Einleitung”</ref> [note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>], p. 24): “If general conditions have improved by next year and the Amsterdam performance of the orchestral pieces (Webern’s) or any other performances of Webern will have taken place, then I shall accept something of his for Universal Edition, because I know that this will make you happy.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-39">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/AEmMPSJmQNC8FHZ=h99nHAr.20150630T093743Z">Webern to Jalowetz, 28 June 1914</ref> (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/7rrJdASpRdqwIa3W2pNqwAC.20230526T221421959808014Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefe an Heinrich Jalowetz</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-10">10</ref>], p. 311). See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Z4w9gFB2RxeetuH9BF9RBg4.20240808T132041350727423Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 25 June 1915</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 18255]): “Oh, God, this is wonderful. So I’ll have to wait until the second half of next year. Hertzka promised me that he will definitely publish something around that time; the chorus and a volume of songs or the violin pieces.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-40">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/O3BK7rlhSZKFEQRUOYDgrwq.20201104T095539Z">Bungardt, “Einleitung”</ref> [note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>), pp. 25 f.: “Given the new situation, the company’s priorities shifted with regard to how they might utilize their available capacity for promising and ‘contemporary’ projects and products, which now primarily comprised ‘war music’ and works of music theatre. In 1915 and in the subsequent war years, they accordingly signed initial contracts with composers who were ‘new to our publishing house’. However, contributions by Webern to those genres were neither forthcoming, nor to be expected.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-41">
          <hi rend="italic">Das moderne Lied. Eine Sammlung von 50 Gesängen für mittlere Stimme</hi>, ed. Josef V. v. Wöss, Vienna: Universal Edition, 1915. See also Berg to Schoenberg, 20 July 1914 (cited as in <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Arnold Schönberg – Alban Berg</hi>, ed. Juliane Brand, Christopher Hailey and Andreas Mayer [Briefwechsel der Wiener Schule 3], vol. 1, p. 492): “Anyway, we’ll be writing to Webern for a song. I think he’ll send one of his George songs.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-42">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Ok_dyBNxS_C_WG0sP0QkXQs.20240706T16412645977271Z">Webern to Hertzka, 23 July 1914</ref> (cited as in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>], p. 87): “In response to your letter of 20 July, I am sending you 3 songs of mine to choose from. I hope that these songs are short enough.” See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/YD0xFXLJSz6nIeLEKiEBrQG.20240706T164140207716027Z">Webern to Hertzka, 29 September 1914</ref> (<hi rend="italic">ibid.</hi>, pp. 87 f.): “Please let me know whether the two songs of mine that I sent to Universal-Edition in July at their request for possible inclusion in their collection ‘Das moderne Lied’ are still needed. If not, please send the songs back to me as soon as possible. I have no other copies of them.” It is unclear why Webern only mentions two songs here, not three.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-43">See Kalmus to Berg, 27 July 1914 (cited as in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/O3BK7rlhSZKFEQRUOYDgrwq.20201104T095539Z">Bungardt, “Einleitung”</ref> (note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>), p. 25): “[…] including your song (and also the song by Dr v. Webern) [would] entail rearranging the content of the whole volume [...], meaning that we would have to organize a very different order for the songs that are already being engraved […].”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-44">This title page is also mentioned by Elmar Budde (though without any reference to the corrected opus number): <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/VfMmEwydSQqq52k0wKuWpQR.20230526T225305581437003Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Anton Weberns Lieder op.</hi>
            <hi rend="italic">3. </hi>
            <hi rend="italic">Untersuchungen zur frühen Atonalität bei Webern</hi>, Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1971 (Beihefte zum Archiv für Musikwissenschaft 9</ref>), p. 13, and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 119. The same title page also bears the title – written and framed in pencil – “5 Lieder | op. 4 [corrected from ‘5’]”, which presumably refers to the <hi rend="italic">Five Songs on Poems of Stefan George</hi> that were published as Op. 4 in 1923. The entire page has been crossed out several times, and it is part of the back page of a sheet of paper used as a cover for the fair copy of the <hi rend="italic">Five Songs</hi>, Op. 4, in <hi rend="bold">H</hi>.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-45">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Kk1LwGjKSQurszAtBL2UGgT.20230526T215414102995876Z">Webern to Jalowetz, 10 January 1915</ref> (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/7rrJdASpRdqwIa3W2pNqwAC.20230526T221421959808014Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefe an Heinrich Jalowetz</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-10">10</ref>], pp. 332–334, here p. 333: “I had been busy with revising, partially reworking, re-orchestrating and copying my previous things etc. Now, I think, everything is in order, as far as I’m able to judge it myself.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-46">This concert ultimately featured again Webern’s <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Yh91U7HQRr=tS9=AvZ6=FgL.20240706T164223083836591Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Five Movements for String Quartet</hi> M 147–151</ref> and the first performance of his <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/hc0oIJblRH64d9of5jT0nQP.20240706T164226449599508Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Four Pieces for Violin and Piano</hi> M 161–164</ref>. See “Neue Kompositionen von Alban Berg, Karl Horwitz und Anton von Webern”, 24 April 1911, Vienna, Ehrbar Hall. Reprint of the programme in Alban Berg, ed. Erich Alban Berg, <hi rend="italic">Leben und Werk in Daten und Bildern</hi>, Frankfurt am Main: Insel, 1976, p. 119. See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/3cYV_39_SACShdpGtmL9oQz.20240706T164038723667837Z">Webern to Berg, 14 April 1911</ref> (cited as in <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Anton Webern – Alban Berg</hi> [note <ref target="#note-31">31</ref>]): “I don’t have my songs here at all; they are in Berlin with my wife. And she is at present in a sanatorium; apart from a woman caretaker, no one is there who could get into the apartment. And it will be too late by the time I come to Vienna. This young lady will hardly be able to learn these songs in 3 days. It won’t be possible like that.” We do not know who had been proposed to sing these songs.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-47">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Dx=J81qWTMmsqKQTNqpAxQv.20111119T000723Z">Webern to Berg, 2 June 1912</ref> (cited as in <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Anton Webern – Alban Berg</hi> [note <ref target="#note-31">31</ref>]): “I think it would work quite well to do 4 of my songs instead of my violin pieces (if they are not possible). [...] I think that it’ll be OK with Winternitz if she sings something else that evening. [...] But hopefully it will all be unnecessary, and Rosé will play.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-48">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/SV2Gtj=HSa6dn6Npx4TM8QT.20111119T000730Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 7 October 1913</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 22024]).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-49">See e. g. <hi rend="italic">Neue Freie Presse</hi>, 20 February 1913, p. 13.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-50">See e. g. “Große Lärmszenen im Musikvereinssaale. Bei einem Arnold[-]Schönberg-Konzert”, in: <hi rend="italic">Neue Freie Presse</hi>, 1 April 1913, p. 13.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-51">See the leaf inserted before fol. 1 in <hi rend="bold">C</hi>: “Le manuscript fut venus à Marya Freund vers 1914.” If this date is correct, this would also be a <hi rend="italic">terminus ante quem</hi> for the composition of version 3 of the song in <hi rend="bold">C</hi> and the corresponding layer of corrections in <hi rend="bold">F</hi>. This note was presumably made by Freund’s son, Dodo Conrad (“D. C.”).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-52">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/QSl53qFcRga1QhuAczVmYAF.20111119T000730Z">See Webern to Schoenberg, 12 October 1913</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 22025]): “We will shorten the programme. Perhaps without the vocal stuff.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-53">Verein für musikalische Privataufführungen in Wien, “Mitteilungen Nr. 5”, 16 March 1919 (A-Was, Resource ID 4957), pp. 2 and 7 (programme No. 45): “Four Songs, Op. 3, from <hi rend="italic">Der siebente Ring</hi> by Stefan George”. We know nothing about why the song was omitted that was later made No. 3. It is possible that Webern’s idea for this collection at that time indeed only encompassed four songs, and that he changed the number for the repeat performance and for the work’s publication (which he might well have only begun to plan at this time).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-54">See Gottfried Kassowitz to Berg, 7 June 1919 (A-Wn, F21.Berg.920/15 Mus Mag): “The performance of the Webern songs was again quite wonderful [...]. [...] Should I have sent you the Webern songs? [...] They were available for sale punctually yesterday, in time for the performance, and they have come out very well, both in their extremely clear, beautiful engraving and in their very beautiful external appearance.” See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/v1QYcbTXQayQ2G7OTDD3wAT.20111119T000729Z">Berg to Webern, 18 June 1919</ref> (cited as in <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Anton Webern – Alban Berg</hi> [note <ref target="#note-31">31</ref>]): “I finally have the engraved songs too! They have turned out very beautiful. I am really happy about them. These songs and Pierrot are now the only scores that I have here.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-55">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/O3BK7rlhSZKFEQRUOYDgrwq.20201104T095539Z">Bungardt, “Einleitung”</ref> (note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>), p. 26: “The songs […] were engraved and printed by Waldheim-Eberle at the expense of the Verein and on Schoenberg’s initiative.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-56">The List of Sources in our Critical Report does not include such sources that may not have survived.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-57">The dedication copy for Schoenberg (A-Was, PM_Lg14) is dated “4. VI. 1919 Mödling”, i. e. two days before the work’s complete performance at the Verein’s concert. The dedication reads: “Dearest friend, the fact that I have written these songs, that they have been sung and ultimately also engraved: I owe all this to you. I can only express my gratitude to you by saying: accept once again the assurance of my everlasting loyalty and devotion. Your Webern.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-58">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/O3BK7rlhSZKFEQRUOYDgrwq.20201104T095539Z">Bungardt, “Einleitung”</ref> (note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>), pp. 26 and 30, and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>
          </ref>, (note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>), Appendix, pp. 336 f. Universal Edition took on 137 copies and pasted its own publishing information over that of the Verein. A second edition, published by Universal Edition in the summer of 1923 (<ref target="https://edition.anton-webern.ch/dev/edition/complex/op3/report#source_M">
            <hi rend="bold">M</hi>
          </ref>), used the same engraving as the first (as do all later, posthumous editions).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-59">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>), Appendix, pp. 336 f.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-60">See the extant concert programme in A-Was: CP 5580. See also the letter of 2 December 1923 from Rufer to Schoenberg (US-Wc [cited here as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 15189]): “[R]egrettably, Miss Jungbauer had such stage fright for the Webern songs that the first 3 failed completely, even though we sang through everything once more an hour before the performance and everything was quite impeccable!!”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-61">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 524. See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/cWW=Kk8SSFa1Dt3RAJSqzQj.20171114T110153Z">Erich Schmid, <hi rend="italic">Lebenserinnerungen</hi>, vol. 3: “Konzertprogramme und Radioaufnahmen”, ed. Lukas Näf, assisted by Othmar Wüthrich, Bern: Peter Lang, 2014</ref>, p. 48.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-62">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/J3dHVwxrT6ShMNexfmX37AS.20160729T071233Z">Ivan Vojtěch, “Die Konzerte des Prager Vereins”, in: <hi rend="italic">Schönbergs Verein für musikalische Privataufführungen</hi>, ed. Horst Weber, Munich: edition text + kritik, 1984, pp. 115–118</ref>, here p. 115.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-63">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/HzRHukHYQjqiAlP593bdygI.20230526T22342083751322Z">Webern to Hertzka, 21 March 1925</ref> (cited as in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>], pp. 106 f., here p. 107): “[…] Mrs Herlinger sang songs by me”, and the commentary by the editor.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-64">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/fZdB0ROBRTejOb9=5=uzwQ7.20160615T122219Z">Jennifer Doctor, <hi rend="italic">The BBC and Ultra-Modern Music, 1922–1936. Shaping a Nation’s Tastes</hi>, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 (Music in the Twentieth Century 10)</ref>, p. 345.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-65">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), pp. 265 f.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-66">See the facsimile of the programme in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 358.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-67">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/vhE7a0=OTRG3r8BRpZfobA9.20230526T232959555769199Z">Universal Edition (Erwin Stein) to Webern, 18 November 1931</ref> (cited as in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>], pp. 171 f., here p. 171): “[…] Amsterdam performed your 4 Songs Op. 12 and 2 songs from Op. 3 (I haven’t yet been able to find out which) on the 18<hi rend="super">th</hi> of this month”, plus the commentary of the editor.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-68">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 403.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-69">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/1vgKlgZiSmamG3tISQdsVgs.20111119T000740Z">Webern to Hildegard Jone, 10 December 1934</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–143): “On Monday, the 17<hi rend="super">th</hi>, in a concert of the Verein f. neue Musik [...] Ms. Mihascek [<hi rend="italic">sic</hi>] [...] will sing my Songs Op. 3; (there are five); Steuermann will be accompanying. Ms. Mihascek [<hi rend="italic">sic</hi>] was the first to sing the complete opus of these songs back then. I think she will do it beautifully again.” See also [Paul Stefan], “Konzert-Tagebuch”, in: <hi rend="italic">Die Stunde</hi>, 19 December 1934, p. 4. See also Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 419.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-70">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 524. See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/cWW=Kk8SSFa1Dt3RAJSqzQj.20171114T110153Z">Schmid, <hi rend="italic">Lebenserinnerungen</hi>, vol. 3</ref> (note <ref target="#note-61">61</ref>), p. 48.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-71">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/c7CjO_0WRN2muvMC4hcEFg4.20170606T072859Z">Erich Schmid, <hi rend="italic">Lebenserinnerungen</hi>, vol. 1: “Autobiographie”, ed. Lukas Näf, Bern: Peter Lang, 2014</ref>, p. 327, and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/cWW=Kk8SSFa1Dt3RAJSqzQj.20171114T110153Z">
            <hi rend="italic">ibid.</hi>, vol. 3</ref> (note <ref target="#note-61">61</ref>), pp. 53 f. The songs performed on this occasion most likely comprised the same selection of Webern’s songs that the same performers had included in their concert of 10 February 1940 in Basel.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-72">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), pp. 553 f. This concert included the world premiere of the <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi> Op. 23 by the same two performers.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-73">Regarding these stations in Webern’s biography during the war, see <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), pp. 174–189 and 209–222.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-74">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/H5DrXSF5TuWXJolbQKyjdQs.20230527T000627589376621Z">Webern to Jalowetz, 18 December 1914</ref>, in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/7rrJdASpRdqwIa3W2pNqwAC.20230526T221421959808014Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefe an Heinrich Jalowetz</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-10">10</ref>], pp. 329 f., here p. 329). It is possible that Webern is here referring to several fragments that were placed immediately before “Der Tag ist vergangen” M 212 in Moldenhauer’s work catalogue and dated by him “1914” or “1914 or later”, i. e. M 207–211. See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), pp. 702 and 736–739.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-75">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Kk1LwGjKSQurszAtBL2UGgT.20230526T215414102995876Z">Webern to Jalowetz, 10 January 1915</ref> (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/7rrJdASpRdqwIa3W2pNqwAC.20230526T221421959808014Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefe an Heinrich Jalowetz</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-10">10</ref>], pp. 332 f., here p. 333).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-76">First published in Vienna: A. Hartleben, 1891. Webern presumably used the revised version of the novel as published in vol. 19 of Rosegger’s “Collected Works”, Leipzig: Staackmann, 1914, p. 214 (“Der Tag ist vergangen …”): <hi rend="bold">Rosegger_PM</hi>. See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/e_PDyJ8ETGKQ_S2hcsaTKw3.20160531T085913Z">Elisabeth Kaiser, <hi rend="italic">Rosegger-Rezeption bei Anton Webern</hi>, Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 2013</ref>, p. 77.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-77">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/G6=IxM4QSxSyYYYEcHy0=QR.20240314T102618314976347Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 9 January 1915</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 18237]).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-78">For an overview of the works by Rosegger that Webern is proven to have read, see <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/e_PDyJ8ETGKQ_S2hcsaTKw3.20160531T085913Z">Kaiser, <hi rend="italic">Rosegger-Rezeption</hi>
          </ref>, (note <ref target="#note-76">76</ref>), pp. 38–41. On <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/npwAxPuWQcyQ3p8Kdne5xAD.20111119T000718Z">3 September 1914, Webern wrote enthusiastically to Berg</ref> that he had seen the writer on a train journey from Klagenfurt to Vienna (cited as in <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Anton Webern – Alban Berg</hi> [note <ref target="#note-31">31</ref>]): “I saw Rosegger in Krieglach (on the return journey)[.] Wonderful. He travelled for one stop on the same train: to Langenwang.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-79">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/e_PDyJ8ETGKQ_S2hcsaTKw3.20160531T085913Z">Kaiser, <hi rend="italic">Rosegger-Rezeption</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-76">76</ref>), pp. 76 f.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-80">The text section of this journal writes the following about this song (N. N., “Anton v. Webern”, in: <hi rend="italic">Musikblätter des Anbruch</hi> 4/9–10 [May 1922], p. 150): “Our music supplement provides an insight into the essence of his new compositions.” This music supplement correctly dates the song to 1915, thus seven years earlier.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-81">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/8MWjoNXWQRq6Xt=7mbN0pQs.20240315T164859137897091Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 21 January 1915</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 18240]).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-82">August Strindberg, <hi rend="italic">Gespenstersonate</hi>, in Strindberg, <hi rend="italic">Kammerspiele</hi>, translated into German by Emil Schering, Munich and Leipzig: Georg Müller, 1908 (Strindbergs Werke. Deutsche Gesamtausgabe unter Mitwirkung von Emil Schering als Übersetzer, vom Dichter selbst veranstaltet. I. Abteilung: Dramen. Kammerspiele [9]), [No. 3], p. 46[c] (“Schien mirs, als ich sah die Sonne!”): <hi rend="bold">Strindberg_Gs</hi>. Webern’s copy is held by CH-Bps, Anton Webern Collection, and bears the shelfmark AW B 1129. The manuscript date is given on p. [6].</note>
        <note xml:id="note-83">Regarding the “influence of Strindberg” on Webern, see Ernst Lichtenhahn, “Einleitung”, in: <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/7rrJdASpRdqwIa3W2pNqwAC.20230526T221421959808014Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefe an Heinrich Jalowetz</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-10">10</ref>), pp. 9–108, here pp. 80–88.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-84">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/MLXYnxIpT5ionRDwPWBumgl.20150716T111606Z">Webern to Jalowetz, 28 January 1917</ref> (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/7rrJdASpRdqwIa3W2pNqwAC.20230526T221421959808014Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefe an Heinrich Jalowetz</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-10">10</ref>], p. 355).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-85">In <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), pp. 700 and 720, <hi rend="italic">Blumengruß</hi> is designated “M 21”. This was corrected in the German edition (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/OQuMlQB_QYCZA5wgvzmThAw.20230526T231228092746021Z">Anton von Webern. Chronik seines Lebens und Werkes, Zurich: Atlantis, 1980</ref>, pp. 640 and 651).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-86">See e. g. <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/6TzQprHtSJe8b37WCr24ww_.20230526T233723347149292Z">Webern to Berg, 21 December 1911</ref> (cited as in <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Anton Webern – Alban Berg</hi> [note <ref target="#note-31">31</ref>]: “I’m reading ‘Wilhelm Meister’ and am absolutely delighted by this book.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-87">
          <hi rend="italic">Gleich und Gleich</hi> is found in vol. 1, <hi rend="italic">Gedichte. Erster Teil</hi>, p. 19: <hi rend="bold">Goethe_JA</hi>. No copies of this edition are known to be extant that might have been in Webern’s possession. The list is held by CH-Bps, Anton Webern Collection.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-88">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 276. It was Moldenhauer who brought together these two compositions as “Two Goethe Songs” (<hi rend="italic">ibid.</hi> p. 661); there is no documentary evidence in the sources to justify his having done so.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-89">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/iG1U=EsiRiqjmR=k=ms1rgV.20230526T221050572435672Z">Anton Webern, <hi rend="italic">Wege zur neuen Musik</hi>, ed. Willi Reich, Vienna: Universal Edition, 1960</ref>, p. 55 (lecture of 12 February 1932).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-90">Hans Bethge, <hi rend="italic">Die chinesische Flöte</hi>, Leipzig: Inselverlag, <hi rend="super">4</hi>[1914] p. 35 (<hi rend="italic">Die geheimnisvolle Flöte</hi>): <hi rend="bold">Bethge_DchF</hi>. Webern’s copy is held in CH-Bps, Anton Webern Collection, shelfmark AW B 1027.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-91">Webern in fact already knew the texts that Mahler had set in <hi rend="italic">Das Lied von der Erde</hi> before that work was given its first performance. See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/dXDo7_OHRTaeEYIePRr4iAc.20230526T234435313351765Z">Webern to Berg, 30 October 1911</ref> (cited as in <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Anton Webern – Alban Berg</hi> [note <ref target="#note-31">31</ref>]): “When you’ve read the close of the texts of the ‘Lied von der Erde’ on the enclosed sheet, my dear, don’t you then expect the most wonderful music in existence; something so magnificent that it has never existed before. ‘Oh, my friend, fortune was not fair to me in this world! Wherever I go and wander in the mountains, I seek rest, rest for my lonely heart!...’ For heaven’s sake, what music this must be! I imagine I ought to be able to think of it already, before even having heard it. Goodness, can you stand it? I can’t.” Regarding the intense impression that Mahler’s composition made on Webern, also in the context of its supposedly ‘Chinese’ texts, see <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/AXUebpxMRze0b44uDENPnwn.20240808T135929756259677Z">Matthias Schmidt, “Übersetzung ohne Original? Gustav Mahler, Anton Webern und Li Bai”, in: <hi rend="italic">Der doppelte Po und die Musik. Chinesisch-Rätoromanische Studien, besonders zu Li Po, Harry Partch und Chasper Po</hi>, ed. Mathias Gredig, Marc Winter, Rico Valär and Roman Brotbeck, with editorial assistance from Daniel Allenbach, Würzburg: Königshausen &amp; Neumann, 2021, pp. 281–299</ref>.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-92">A-Wst, on deposit from Universal Edition, Anton Webern. The list is given as an illustration and transcribed in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/O3BK7rlhSZKFEQRUOYDgrwq.20201104T095539Z">Julia Bungardt, “Einleitung”</ref> (note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>), pp. 28 f. This worklist extends as far as the <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/jH5YpO9GRhGZri3hqDU=1Ai.20230527T001139890225478Z">Trakl songs Op. 14</ref>, here given as “Op. 12”.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-93">Near this correction, we can also discern “13” in a further layer that has been erased.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-94">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/n9W6qeuPRy=Uldx1BQpT2wG.20230526T224424305505543Z">Egon Wellesz, “Anton von Webern: Lieder opus 12, 13, 14”, in: <hi rend="italic">Melos</hi> 2/2 (February 1921), pp. 38–40</ref>. See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/BfucVZXdQAGjETL7w0DwpAI.20230526T191143407072559Z">Webern to Jalowetz, 13 March 1921</ref> (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/7rrJdASpRdqwIa3W2pNqwAC.20230526T221421959808014Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefe an Heinrich Jalowetz</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-10">10</ref>, p. 481): “There was an article by Wellesz in Scherchen’s journal about my songs Opp. 12, 13 and 14. That really pleased me.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-95">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/VGKttoOdR4GkE0iYLH=OVwn.20230526T234853385813208Z">Webern to Hertzka, 3 January 1925</ref> (cited as in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>], pp. 101–104, here p. 101). See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/HzRHukHYQjqiAlP593bdygI.20230526T22342083751322Z">Webern to Hertzka, 21 March 1925</ref> (<hi rend="italic">ibid.</hi>, pp. 106 f., here p. 106): “Already in early January, I brought you a booklet of 4 songs with piano, Op. 12, and you held out the prospect to me that they would appear soon.” An initial contract dates from 5 February 1925 and a revised contract from 3 April 1925.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-96">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/wlfkU=K0QYunja5VnryXJgJ.20230526T23272781828611Z">Webern to Universal Edition, 12 June</ref> and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/rVdHJ1UuRzmV_Ts5jqe5GAY.20230526T232732231576013Z">20 June 1925</ref> (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">
            <hi rend="italic">ibid.</hi>
          </ref>, pp. 110 f.).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-97">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">
            <hi rend="italic">ibid.</hi>
          </ref> (Appendix), pp. 340 f.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-98">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/7zwaLS37QWalDq7VNy9xigZ.20240706T164025899900013Z">Berg to Webern, 12 October 1925</ref> (cited as in <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Anton Webern – Alban Berg</hi> [note <ref target="#note-31">31</ref>]).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-99">See the announcement of the concert in: <hi rend="italic">Neue Freie Presse</hi>, 5 January 1927, p. 9. According to a review of the world premiere of Berg’s <hi rend="italic">Lyric Suite</hi>, it was preceded by Ludwig van Beethoven’s Piano Trio in E-flat Major, Op. 70, No. 2 (see <hi rend="italic">Neues Wiener Journal</hi>, 12 January 1927, p. 11; there is no mention here of either Webern’s songs or Bach’s concerto). According to an announcement in: <hi rend="italic">Die Stunde</hi>, 9 January 1927, p. 1, Co van Geuns sang “songs by Anton Webern” again the next day in the small hall of the Musikverein. We have no details of this concert. In a <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/L015Z9QaTe2YX3Fc1YWVtwu.20170901T094855Z">letter to Jalowetz of 20 December 1926</ref>, Webern wrote of a total of six songs that were to be performed the following January: “In January, a Dutch singer will sing 6 songs by me here in Vienna.” (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/7rrJdASpRdqwIa3W2pNqwAC.20230526T221421959808014Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefe an Heinrich Jalowetz</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-10">10</ref>], p. 570). It is possible that van Geuns had prepared Op. 12 and a selection of Webern’s George songs.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-100">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/YUYpUaYFRbO5m8PcSgSztQ1.20150714T103621Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 17 January 1927</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 22230]).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-101">pp. [Paul Pisk], “Neue Musik im Konzertsaal”, in: <hi rend="italic">Arbeiter-Zeitung</hi> [Vienna], 11 January 1927, p. 7.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-102">Anton Webern, notebook (CH-Bps, Anton Webern Collection). Cited as in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 265. We have no details about this concert.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-103">N. N., “Konzertierende Künstler und neue Musik”, in: <hi rend="italic">Musikblätter des Anbruch</hi> 9/3 (March 1927), p. 153: “Co van  G e u n s  sang songs by Webern and Zemlinsky with success in Cologne.” See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/7rrJdASpRdqwIa3W2pNqwAC.20230526T221421959808014Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefe an Heinrich Jalowetz</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-10">10</ref>), p. 572.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-104">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/fZdB0ROBRTejOb9=5=uzwQ7.20160615T122219Z">Jennifer Doctor, <hi rend="italic">The BBC and Ultra-Modern Music, 1922–1936</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-64">64</ref>), p. 345.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-105">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 265. See also <hi rend="italic">ibid.</hi>, p. 266: “The same year, three of the <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi> were heard in Frankfurt.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-106">See the facsimile of the complete programme in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 358.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-107">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/vhE7a0=OTRG3r8BRpZfobA9.20230526T232959555769199Z">Universal Edition (Erwin Stein) to Webern, 18. November 1931</ref> (cited as in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>], pp. 171 f., here p. 171): “[…] Amsterdam performed your 4 Songs Op. 12 and 2 songs from Op. 3 (I haven’t yet been able to find out which) on the 18<hi rend="super">th</hi> of this month”, plus the commentary of the editor.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-108">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 403.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-109">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/yrMDPGFqTguUaAQHxK1AhQy.20111119T000744Z">Webern to Josef Humplik, 8 May 1935</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–157): “Tomorrow evening, at 6:30, songs by Schoenberg, Berg and myself [the <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12] will be sung [...] at an event of the Hertzka Memorial Foundation.” We know that the singer was Nessy, given the connection with the performance of the <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12, on 21 November 1935 (see note <ref target="#note-110">110</ref> below). We can no longer determine who played the piano accompaniment.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-110">See H. E. H., “Neue Musik im Hagenbund”, in: <hi rend="italic">Wiener Zeitung</hi>, 23 November 1935, p. 9. The pianists for this concert were <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/yrMDPGFqTguUaAQHxK1AhQy.20111119T000744Z">Olga Novacovic</ref> and Eduard Steuermann, though we are unable to determine which of them accompanied Webern’s songs. In <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 451, Moldenhauer erroneously states that Webern’s Concerto, Op. 24, was also performed at this concert, under the baton of the composer. In fact, Webern had announced this work for the concert programme but had then withdrawn it, and the <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12, served as its substitute. See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/_P8rbDTYQJiFgKzNtAEltAG.20111119T000744Z">Webern to Jone and Humplik, 20 November 1935</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–169): “Now I have to inform you that I have withdrawn my Concerto tomorrow [...]. [...] It is possible that the songs that you heard in May this year will be performed instead of the Concerto [since the same singer will be performing anyway].” See also the commentary of the editor in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/K82xj8z7TkiG7PWQZ7loagY.20200402T144652Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Anton Webern und Minna Webern – Hildegard Jone und Josef Humplik. Korrespondenz 1926–1949</hi>, ed. Barbara Schingnitz, doctoral thesis, University of Basel, 2019</ref>.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-111">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 524. See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/cWW=Kk8SSFa1Dt3RAJSqzQj.20171114T110153Z">Schmid, <hi rend="italic">Lebenserinnerungen</hi>, vol. 3</ref> (note <ref target="#note-61">61</ref>), p. 48.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-112">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/c7CjO_0WRN2muvMC4hcEFg4.20170606T072859Z">Erich Schmid, <hi rend="italic">Lebenserinnerungen</hi>, vol. 1</ref> (note <ref target="#note-71">71</ref>), p. 327, and <hi rend="italic">ibid.</hi>, vol. 3 (note <ref target="#note-61">61</ref>), pp. 53 f. The songs performed on this occasion most likely comprised the same selection that the same performers had included in their concert of 10 February 1940 in Basel.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-113">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/BdY0sf8yRxa9=JzFq2DuDQp.20111119T000739Z">Webern to Jone, 6 August 1928</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–11): “Now let’s hope that something will come of our joint work. The fact that the suggestion came from me might let you realize just how dear to me is your way of thinking, indeed how congenial it is. –”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-114">See Jone to Ludwig von Ficker, 28 November 1928 (Brenner Archive, Innsbruck [cited as in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/p4nVL3COSo66wyIPsxwxrg=.20170124T135040Z">Thomas Reinecke, <hi rend="italic">Hildegard Jone (1891–1963). Untersuchungen zu Leben, Werk und Veröffentlichungskontexten. </hi>
            <hi rend="italic">Zugleich eine Studie zu einigen Figuren im Denken Anton Weberns und den von ihm vertonten Texten</hi>, Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 1999</ref>, p. 51]): “In the autumn, I wrote three opera texts for Anton Webern, who urgently wrote to me last spring, asking me for something: The Transformation of Love, The Last Encounter, The Spaces of the Interior and its Guests.” A manuscript by Jone entitled <hi rend="italic">Die letzte Begegnung</hi> (“The Last Encounter”, with a dedication to Ferdinand Ebner) is held in CH-Bps, Hildegard Jone Collection (TM 26). See also Barbara Schingnitz, [“Einleitung”], in: <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/K82xj8z7TkiG7PWQZ7loagY.20200402T144652Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Webern und Webern – Jone und Humplik</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-110">110</ref>), pp. LXVII ff.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-115">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Q_vVv473TgWue1sA0WzJMw9.20111119T000739Z">Webern to Jone, 17 January 1930</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–35).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-116">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/Q_vVv473TgWue1sA0WzJMw9.20111119T000739Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Ibid.</hi>
          </ref>: “The fact that you’re repeatedly thinking about writing me a ‘libretto’ makes me very happy.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-117">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/dQPdl1rCSb6BgUEC8JPNvAK.20111119T000739Z">Webern to Jone, 8 September 1930</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–48).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-118">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/dQPdl1rCSb6BgUEC8JPNvAK.20111119T000739Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Ibid.</hi>
          </ref>: “Now I am very occupied with the idea of writing a cantata. My request is this: might you want to write such a text for me? Who else could it be, but you, dear Mrs Jone! This idea won’t let go of me, and so I had to say it.” The “idea of writing a cantata” was perhaps also motivated by the fact that Webern was at this time rehearsing Johann Sebastian Bach’s <hi rend="italic">Actus tragicus</hi>. See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/35j7ACpQTfqVTg8y5vpVEgR.20160531T110811Z">Regina Busch, “Webern, Bach und Kantaten”, in: <hi rend="italic">webern_21</hi>, ed. Dominik Schweiger and Nikolaus Urbanek, Vienna: Böhlau, 2009 (Wiener Veröffentlichungen zur Musikgeschichte 8)</ref>, pp. 221–244.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-119">See the editor’s occasional references in her commentary to <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/K82xj8z7TkiG7PWQZ7loagY.20200402T144652Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Webern und Webern – Jone und Humplik</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-110">110</ref>). Regarding the difficulties in identifying individual poems and their different versions (as well as the resulting inaccuracies in much of the relevant research literature), see <hi rend="italic">ibid.</hi> (“Exkurs: Problematik der Quellenlage in Jones Nachlass”), p. XXI: “[I]n most cases, the copies of poems and poem collections that were sent to Webern cannot be identified unambiguously, inasmuch as their existence may be deduced from their correspondence. This is because, with a few exceptions, [...] Webern’s archives no longer hold any autograph poems by Jone that are not connected to the context of their composition. Their correspondence also makes it clear that Webern regularly received copies of texts by Jone, and that he returned them after some time (often copying out passages from them for himself); nor can these copies be found, neither in Webern’s archives nor in Jone’s archives.” Webern himself subsequently made a manuscript copy of all the poems by Jone that he had set to music (US-Wc, Moldenhauer Archives 59/2) in preparation for an “Evening of Contemporary Poetry” that he began planning in the early summer of 1944, to be held on 29 November of that year. See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/LAwxl23rQnS4czKf6gEFWA9.20240706T164105425615275Z">Webern to Jone, 30 April 1944</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–285): “I have already copied the poems I have composed, as you wished [...] and I shall bring the booklet with me […].”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-120">Hildegard Jone, <hi rend="italic">Viae inviae</hi>, in: <hi rend="italic">Der Brenner</hi> 13 (1932), pp. 60–74, here pp. 64 (“Das dunkle Herz”) and 65 (“Du stürzt aus Höhen” and “Herr Jesus mein”): <hi rend="bold">Jone_Vi</hi>. See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/TX8_PTRRSZmq2krwMkXUpw8.20111119T000740Z">Webern to Jone, 3 November 1932</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–85): “I am very much looking forward to your poems in ‘Brenner’.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-121">For information both on the organization of this <hi rend="italic">Brenner </hi>edition as a memorial volume for Ferdinand Ebner, who had often written for the journal, and on the connection between Jone’s poetry and Ebner’s philosophy, see <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/p4nVL3COSo66wyIPsxwxrg=.20170124T135040Z">Reinecke, <hi rend="italic">Hildegard Jone</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-114">114</ref>), pp. 175–187.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-122">See Ferdinand Ebner, <hi rend="italic">Notizen Tagebücher Lebenserinnerungen</hi>, ed. Franz Seyr, Munich: Kösel, 1963 (Ferdinand Ebner Schriften 2), p. 1033: “Dr Webern in the studio [i. e. in the studio of Humplik and Jone] – at the request of Mrs Jone.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-123">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/K82xj8z7TkiG7PWQZ7loagY.20200402T144652Z">Schingnitz, [“Einleitung”]</ref> (note <ref target="#note-110">110</ref>), pp. LI f.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-124">After an untitled, introductory poem, Section II comprises contains four sections, each numbered with an Arabic numeral, all of which present self-contained, individual poems: 1. “Das Augenlicht” (later the text for Webern’s Op. 26), 2. “Christophorus”, 3. “Der Berg” and 4. “Zwischen Tag und Nacht”. The 3<hi rend="super">rd</hi> and 4<hi rend="super">th</hi> sections are each followed by groups of verses separated by asterisks. It is not clear whether these verse groups comprise a continuation in each case of the texts given under the aforementioned two titles, or whether they constitute independent poems.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-125">Regarding his protracted work on the first movement of Op. 24, see <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/jNzcdrTYRbiC5xNadH8qvQL.20230526T214402483046761Z">Kathryn Bailey, “Symmetry as Nemesis: Webern and the First Movement of the Concerto, Opus 24”, in: <hi rend="italic">Journal of Music Theory</hi> 40/2 (Autumn 1996), pp. 245–310</ref>.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-126">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/jNzcdrTYRbiC5xNadH8qvQL.20230526T214402483046761Z">Webern to Jone, 3 March 1933</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–89).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-127">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/z6bAQIcNQmG405t=th9J=gP.20170130T125413Z">Lauriejean Reinhardt, “Webern’s Literary Encounter with Hildegard Jone”, in: <hi rend="italic">Mitteilungen der Paul Sacher Stiftung</hi> 5 (January 1992), pp. 36–40</ref>. <hi rend="italic">Ibid.</hi>, p. 37 contains a facsimile of a Jone manuscript entitled <hi rend="italic">Die Freude</hi>, which contains most of the lines that Webern set to music in his Op. 23. However, it is unlikely that this manuscript dates from before 1933, or that Webern had it in front of him.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-128">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/p4nVL3COSo66wyIPsxwxrg=.20170124T135040Z">Reinecke, <hi rend="italic">Hildegard Jone</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-114">114</ref>), pp. 297 f.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-129">Arbeiter-Symphonie-Konzert: Ernst Krenek, <hi rend="italic">Kleine Blasmusik</hi>, Op. 70A; Paul A. Pisk, <hi rend="italic">Kantate Campanella</hi>, Op. 28; Hanns Eisler, <hi rend="italic">Das Lied vom Kampf</hi>.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-130">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/iG1U=EsiRiqjmR=k=ms1rgV.20230526T221050572435672Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Wege zur neuen Musik</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-89">89</ref>), pp. 9–44. His lecture series began on 20 February and ended on 10 April. He gave a total of eight lectures, which as a rule took place on Monday evenings, though on two occasions he gave them on a Tuesday (on 7 and 14 March).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-131">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 397, and <hi rend="italic">Radio Wien</hi>, 19 May 1933, p. 42.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-132">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/FJTRpOMPRkCHC=UKQVQhng_.20230526T214449362846109Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 398, and <hi rend="italic">Radio Wien</hi>, 14 July 1933, p. 52.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-133">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/zsOcNz8FQFqrE2_lmZzJSQY.20240706T164148413980037Z">Webern to Jone, 29 July 1933</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–99). The beginning of the first sketch for “Es stürzt aus Höhen” M 313 is indeed dated “26. VII. 33”, thus 12 days after the final date on the continuity draft of “Herr Jesu mein” M 312, not eight days as Webern claims.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-134">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/zsOcNz8FQFqrE2_lmZzJSQY.20240706T164148413980037Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Ibid.</hi>
          </ref>: “So from 4 (roughly) to 10 [August] we’re not here.” See also <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/OQuMlQB_QYCZA5wgvzmThAw.20230526T231228092746021Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), pp. 398 f., where the dates of Webern’s stay in the Tyrol are given as “6–12 August”.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-135">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/2yC2GrjQQoSjOZcVSZL6ogc.20111119T000740Z">Webern to Jone, 3 September 1933</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–101).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-136">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/NJnJv3oWTbaS4yZQy3UZ8wD.20111119T000742Z">Webern to Jone, 24 September 1933</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–104). We do not know of any reaction on Jone’s part to these two songs.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-137">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/NJnJv3oWTbaS4yZQy3UZ8wD.20111119T000742Z">Webern to Jone, 6 January 1934</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–116).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-138">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/OQuMlQB_QYCZA5wgvzmThAw.20230526T231228092746021Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 407, and <hi rend="italic">Radio Wien</hi>, 26 January 1934, p. 16.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-139">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RyG8JNSkTBW0cMes67469QW.20240706T164109940554007Z">Webern to Jone, 14 February 1934</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–119).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-140">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/AVBRYgHbSm=oYNVf71rEwgh.20240706T164041140760045Z">Webern to Humplik, 20 February 1934</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–120): “I’m working again: ‘was wird legt sich mit zarten Wurzeln an das Wartende im Dunkel…’ [‘what is becoming lies with its tender roots against what waits in the darkness’] The more terrible it becomes, the greater the responsibility that our tasks assume.” The continuity draft <hi rend="bold">M 314 Sk3</hi> articulates these thoughts in several variants: mm. {12A, 12B, 13A–15A, 12C}, mm. {12D, 13B–15B, 16A–17A}, mm. {23A–24A}, {13C–15C} and mm. {13D–15D}. See also <hi rend="bold">M 314 Sk3.2</hi>.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-141">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/sF41t91dS66JmZcOBLuyPQI.20240706T164145001349406Z">Webern to Jone, 4/5 March 1934</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–121). See <hi rend="bold">M 314 Sk3</hi> mm. 22B–24B, {25B–27B}.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-142">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/6T7eU7hqT9O3uv3oYujCnQC.20240706T164055148505263Z">Webern to Jone, 11 March 1934</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–122): “‘Wir sind nicht unser, ich und du u. Alle’. I have just finished sketching the melody. So you see, soon the song will have been composed to the end.” Webern presumably refers here to <hi rend="bold">M 314 Sk3.4</hi>.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-143">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/pMK9M7YTSbaS2OApcj3eqgq.20240706T164203790155812Z">Webern to Jone, 20 March 1934</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–123). See also the commentary of the editor in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/K82xj8z7TkiG7PWQZ7loagY.20200402T144652Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Webern und Webern – Jone und Humplik</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-110">110</ref>): “It cannot be determined whether or not Webern ultimately [...] sent a fair copy of the <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 23, to Jone at all, or perhaps handed such a copy over in person; their correspondence offers no hint of this. Jone and Humplik received a copy of the printed work after its publication by Universal Edition […].”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-144">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/bULN3vGIRWGdu8fNhn7uLgo.20240706T164131742133785Z">Webern to Berg, 27 March 1934</ref> (cited as in <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Anton Webern – Alban Berg</hi> [note <ref target="#note-31">31</ref>]).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-145">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/JeE0XvPWQjeHkbrhleau7Ac.20210205T073432Z">Universal Edition (Hugo Winter) to Webern, 11 July 1934</ref> (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>], p. 188). The publishing contract is dated 12 July (see the commentary of the editor, <hi rend="italic">ibid.</hi>, plus Appendix, pp. 344 f.).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-146">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/gtlhczgmQf=KodzbkbxhCgh.20240706T164157126295213Z">Webern to Universal Edition (Yella Hertzka), 12 July 1934</ref> (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>], p. 189).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-147">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/L=N5IFCqTzaYbKIPYFdCpg2.20240706T164141730327885Z">Universal Edition (Erwin Stein) to Webern, 29 August 1934</ref> (<ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>], p. 196).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-148">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>), Appendix, pp. 344 f.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-149">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/yrMDPGFqTguUaAQHxK1AhQy.20111119T000744Z">Webern to Josef Humplik, 8 May 1935</ref> (note <ref target="#note-109">109</ref>).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-150">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/hIPXY0oIRqaLbhp5SYpO5QP.20230707T14590118027961Z">Reich to Webern, 30 August 1943</ref> (CH-END [carbon copy]): “Your ‘sixtieth’, to which you so discreetly refer, was something of which I was naturally already aware, and I have already made all kinds of plans to celebrate the day. [...] A performance of chamber music in Basel (the entire concert exclusively featuring works by Webern) has already been secured for December, within the framework of the ISCM.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-151">Regarding this concert and its complete programme, which included the <hi rend="italic">Five Songs</hi>, Op. 3, also with the performers mentioned here, see <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/OQuMlQB_QYCZA5wgvzmThAw.20230526T231228092746021Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), pp. 553 f.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-152">Bg., in: <hi rend="italic">National-Zeitung</hi>, 7 December 1943 (morning edition), p. 4. See also the commentary of the editor in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/K82xj8z7TkiG7PWQZ7loagY.20200402T144652Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Webern und Webern – Jone und Humplik</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-110">110</ref>) on Webern’s letter to Jone of 4 December 1943.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-153">ay, “Anton Webern in der I. G. N. M.”, in: <hi rend="italic">Basler Nachrichten</hi>, 7 December 1943 (2<hi rend="super">nd</hi> supplement). See also the commentary of the editor in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/K82xj8z7TkiG7PWQZ7loagY.20200402T144652Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel Webern und Webern – Jone und Humplik</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-110">110</ref>) regarding Webern’s letter to Jone of 4 December 1943.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-154">See e. g. <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/1uA6uY6YQCyo11WMVraD3gQ.20111119T000746Z">Webern to Jone, 22 April 1944</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–284): “It would of course be best to find a singer who might be able to sing some of the six songs with piano accompaniment to your texts.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-155">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/QK4KLofDRzexvHaJ5PJawAO.20111119T000746Z">Webern to Jone, 10 August 1944</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–292): “I have been notified that the Swedish singer I mentioned previously has agreed and already studied [the songs].”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-156">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/gJHuO_Y4TdyupK3cbeiobA4.20111119T000737Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 21 March 1934</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 18155]).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-157">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/gJHuO_Y4TdyupK3cbeiobA4.20111119T000737Z">
            <hi rend="italic">Ibid.</hi>
          </ref>
        </note>
        <note xml:id="note-158">Hildegard Jone, <hi rend="italic">Die Freude</hi>, in: <hi rend="italic">Die Schildgenossen</hi> 13/1 (September/October 1933), pp. 16–26, here pp. 16 (“Wie bin ich froh!”), 18 (“Sterne, Ihr silbernen Bienen der Nacht”) and 24 (“Des Herzens Purpurvogel”): <hi rend="bold">Jone_DF</hi>. We must not confuse this cycle <hi rend="italic">Die Freude</hi> with Jone’s individual poem with the same title, which she had included (without explicitly providing a title) in her cycle <hi rend="italic">Viae inviae</hi>, which she had published back in 1932, and which had provided the text for Webern’s <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 23.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-159">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/uXpO24yCS9Cmibkw8PKQmQ7.20111119T000742Z">Webern to Jone, 21 November 1933</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–112): “And how I’m looking forward to your poems in the ‘Schildgenossen[’]!”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-160">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/SYb1vlP=Qe6RYgumT0DOGwj.20111119T000740Z">Webern to Jone, 6 January 1934</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–116): “I would only like to give you the song manuscript [of Op. 23] once it is complete (with the 3<hi rend="super">rd</hi> song). Several ‘Stern’ poems are probably going to be next!”, i. e. poems from the eight “Star” poems in the collection <hi rend="italic">Die Freude</hi>.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-161">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/fns=V0QYTA6sMIuSDci8_QN.20111119T000740Z">Webern to Humplik and Jone, 9 July 1934</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–131).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-162">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/gJHuO_Y4TdyupK3cbeiobA4.20111119T000737Z">Webern to Schoenberg, 18 July 1934</ref> (US-Wc [cited as in the digitized copy in A-Was: ID 22352]).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-163">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/h04nEVYNRQGZoBao5m31qQC.20111119T000740Z">Webern to Jone, 18 July 1934</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–132). In this same letter, which also mentions Bach’s forthcoming birthday, Webern makes a remark that indicates he had meanwhile told Jone the “reasons” for composing this song. (“You know what I owe to him”).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-164">This song is also mentioned on its own on a <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/ZLlccjzUTQC3J5XSK8PyHgs.20111119T000740Z">postcard of 8 August</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–134): “I hope to be able to show you and Pepo [i. e. Humplik] everything soon after my return! and I am already looking forward to it a lot. The song ‘Wie bin ich froh’[.]”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-165">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/OQuMlQB_QYCZA5wgvzmThAw.20230526T231228092746021Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), p. 418, though he erroneously writes that Webern had dedicated a fair copy of the <hi rend="italic">Two Songs</hi>, Op. 19, to Bach and had given it to him on this occasion (Moldenhauer presumably did not have <hi rend="bold">B</hi> available for consultation). Webern had already dedicated the <hi rend="italic">Two Songs</hi>, Op. 19, to Bach in 1928 when the work was published.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-166">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/0X19kNkXS0GjjU7BANlCvwb.20111119T000740Z">Webern to Humplik and Jone, 12 September 1934</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–137).</note>
        <note xml:id="note-167">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/KOeGLusrQYqCmL7101iBdw7.20111119T000740Z">Webern to Jone, 1 October 1934</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–138). We do not know to which “songs” by Jone Webern is here referring.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-168">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/I5Wd0EPqRayJH2mjwMY=rAM.20230707T154340584176862Z">Webern to Jone, 17 October 1934</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–139): “‘Sterne, Ihr silbernen Bienen’ is finished. Now I am busy with [‘]Des Herzens Purpurvogel fliegt durch Nacht’[.]”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-169">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/ADraCcDGSfmDwJRuwV8e6Q5.20230707T153230937186198Z">Webern to Jone, 9 November 1934</ref> (A-Wn HS 431/1–140): “‘Des Herzens Purpurvogel’ will soon be finished. I was just held up a little recently.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-170">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/pNpittyxQquA1oMsAv9clQM.20150930T122331Z">Webern to Boosey &amp; Hawkes (Erwin Stein), 17 October 1938</ref> (cited as in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>], pp. 223 f.). This contact with Boosey &amp; Hawkes resulted in the publication of Webern’s String Quartet, Op. 28. See also in this regard Regina Busch, “Weberns Streichquartett Op. 28 und das Schriftbild seiner Partituren”, in: <hi rend="italic">Webern-Philologien</hi>, ed. Thomas Ahrend and Matthias Schmidt, Vienna: Lafite, 2016 (Webern-Studien 3), pp. 41–76.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-171">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/R9ymYviISyevTmvsdfCN0w6.20210906T131119Z">Universal Edition (Alfred Schlee) to Webern, 1 December 1943</ref> (cited as in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/RlzKk20zRJePbPN9xleTjgl.20201027T135553Z">Webern, <hi rend="italic">Briefwechsel mit der Universal-Edition</hi>
          </ref> [note <ref target="#note-22">22</ref>], p. 284): “It’s also not correct if I inform you that the songs are now going to the engraver’s as a kind of birthday present, because it would naturally have been the proper thing to publish them even regardless of your 60<hi rend="super">th</hi> birthday.” See the editor’s commentary in <hi rend="italic">ibid.</hi>: “There is no documentary evidence that the <hi rend="italic">Three Songs</hi>, Op. 25 were indeed sent ‘to the engraver’s’ after this letter, nor that any contract was concluded.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-172">See <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/VWR=J98HTM=dKH79TEw_mQK.20230526T123203929702635Z">Webern to Erich Schmid, 9 November 1943</ref> (cited as in <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/nErOJMk0RBiibnYguCBulAB.20170606T073232Z">Erich Schmid, <hi rend="italic">Lebenserinnerungen</hi>, vol. 2: Letters, ed. Lukas Näf, Bern: Peter Lang, 2014</ref>, p. 812): “With regard to the photocopy of my songs Op. 25 [...] I hope that 2 copies of them are now finally in your hands. Despite my having repeatedly pursued the matter, their publication has been very much delayed (due to current circumstances).” Schmid had accompanied Gradmann-Lüscher in a performance of Webern’s <hi rend="italic">Five Songs on Poems of Stefan George</hi>, Op. 4, and of his <hi rend="italic">Four Songs</hi>, Op. 12, when <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/8up1blczS5usXWWXmI7kzgN.20230526T164646026558721Z">Webern had visited Basel in 1940</ref>. However, Schmid’s military service prevented him from participating in the concert planned for December 1943. These two copies of the songs ([<hi rend="bold">E<hi rend="super">F1–F2</hi>
          </hi>]), today no longer extant, were presumably sent to Gradmann-Lüscher and <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/IHAK7=ESSKmigjTWgDhmhwa.20171124T083908Z">Paul Baumgartner</ref> before their planned performance, though it seems that they had insufficient time to rehearse them adequately.</note>
        <note xml:id="note-173">See, e. g., <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/1uA6uY6YQCyo11WMVraD3gQ.20111119T000746Z">Webern to Jone, 22 April 1944</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–284): “The best solution would be to find a woman singer [“Sängerin”] who could sing some of the six songs with piano accompaniment that are settings of your texts.”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-174">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/QK4KLofDRzexvHaJ5PJawAO.20111119T000746Z">Webern to Jone, 10 August 1944</ref> (A-Wn, HS 431/1–292): “I have been notified that the Swedish singer I mentioned previously has agreed and already studied [the songs].”</note>
        <note xml:id="note-175">
          <ref target="https://ark.dasch.swiss/ark:/72163/1/0806/OQuMlQB_QYCZA5wgvzmThAw.20230526T231228092746021Z">Moldenhauer, <hi rend="italic">Anton von Webern</hi>
          </ref> (note <ref target="#note-18">18</ref>), pp. 716 f.</note>
      </div>
    </back>
  </text>
</TEI>